Diagramming tessellations
Dorigami asks (20/21 August 97) just exactly what is meant by "tessellations" and asks if what is meant is Escher-like constructions.
Escher-like constructions have, indeed, been created in Origami, especially by Mick Guy in the 1970s. Escher got his inspiration about tiling patterns from the Moorish tiling patterns in the Alhambra Palace in Grenada in Southern Spain. But tiling patterns made from sepate tiles are not what is meant in the present context of Shuzo Fujimoto, Chris Palmer, Tom Hull, Alex Bateman, Paulo Taborda Barreto et al.. It is necessary to distinguish between first, actual physical tiling laid on a floor or wall and second, the total abstract tiling PATTERN which can be analysed mathematically. A tiling pattern acts as a blueprint for laying out tiles on the floor. But in this context, the tiling pattern is studied in its own right by mathematicians and also used itself as a basis of folding by the Origami Tessallators.
To enlarge on this: in the Escher kind of tessellation, many separate paperfolds are made, like pottery tiles, (but usually in more complex shapes: sometimes abstract, sometimes in the shape of animals or fishes) and they are then fitted together physically to make a repetative pattern, just as you would lay tiles of one shape or different shapes on a floor.
In the case of Chris Palmer et al. the word "tessellation" does not relate to separate folded "tiles". It is used in the first instance for a regular PATTERN in the paper which resembles possibly a simple, but more often, a more elaborate tiling pattern. Quite apart from their interest to paperfolders, tiling patterns today form a major branch of recreational mathematics and, indeed, of more serious mathematics concerned with such subjects as that of symmetry, which pervades everything.. Such tiling patterns are usually regular, in which the same pattern repeats itself a periodical intervals over the whole pattern and indeed to infinity if the paper had no edges and could be extended without limit. But in some instances of tiling patterns, such as those discovered by Roger Penrose, the patterns are irregular and do not repeat periodically, (I may add that I, personally, have yet to see an irregular tessellation pattern in Origami. I doubt if it's possible, but I certainly wouldn't be dogmatic about it. Perhaps it's a challenge to the experts).
In this kind of paperfolded tessellation, the crease pattern of maountain and valley folds may first be drawn with a pencil on the paper. Or a network of parallel creases in several directions may made as preliminary guidelines. Then mountain and valley folds are made along the lines in the particular order required by the pattern of the tessellation being folded. Some people prefer to make their creases without preliminary drawn lines, but, except in very simple instances, this is much more difficult. Again, some people, like Paulo Taborda Barreto have discovered how to create their crease patterns by computer.
Having made creases across the whole of the sheet of paper, the pattern is then "collapsed", by folding in the respective valley and mountain crease, doubling the paper, making twist folds and generally cajoling the paper until it is reduced to a flat pattern. I think that "cajoling" is an apt word in this context! Nothing happens quickly. It is usually necessary to work inwards from the edges of the paper, but in my experience, one does whatever seems easiest and most appropriate in the circumstances. I can't pretend that I have ever found it easy, but I expect that practice makes perfect and I have never had the time to practise. Chris Palmer has certainly mastered the art.
Having managed to "collapse" the paper, you will have created your finished work of art. It will be seen that the creases you have made form a pattern of a NEW or secondary tessellation, a sort of bas relief which arises out of, but is different, often unexpectedly different, from the original pattern drawn on the paper before it was creased. Some folded tessellations are three dimensional, with such phenomena as boxes or mountains rising above the tessellated plain at regular intervals.
Then, if you have used semi-transparent paper, you can hold your creased pattern up to the light and you will see yet another hidden pattern painted in light and shade accoring to where the paper is doubled or trebled in thickness.
For more about tessellations, please see my posting to Origami-L dated 16th July, 97, where I give more general information and also say something about Maurits Escher and also Mick Guy's Escher-like tessellations. I added a little more, (mainly about Paolo Taborda Bareto) in my posting dated 19th July.
Tessellations are a long way from mainstream paperfolding, but they are a glorious aspect of the wonderfully diverse kaleidoscope that is Origami.

Tessellations, The Beginning
When did origami tessellations begin?   
First, you may like to start with the article on Tessellations which I wrote some years ago for Origami-L. (This article is undated in the Lister List, but it was written in July, 1997.)
During the 1990s there was growing interest in origami tessellations because Chris Palmer had become interested in this aspect of origami and spent much time demonstrating its techniques at conventions. I first sat at his feet at the New York Convention in June, 1995. However Chris did not originate the style. In August, 2005 I wrote another article with the title “The Alhambra, M.C.Escher and Chris Palmer”, which sets out the wider context of the origins of tessellations and origami tessellations in particular. Unfortunately, this article has not yet arrived in the Lister List: I must make an effort to put it there. It gives some of the background, but may be misleading because it it about the inspiration given by the amazing Islamic patterns of the Alhambra Palace in Granada in Spain and it makes no mention of the contribution of the Japanese folder, Shuzo Fujimoto.
In three issues of British Origami, nos 90, 91 and 92 for August, October and December, 1981, Dave Brill wrote about three folders whom he recognised as having started a significant new trend in origami. The first article was about James Sakoda of the United States who had developed a way of folding paper into tessellated surface patterns. He gave this style the name “Hikari-ori” and his idea was that the fragmented surfaces of the foil paper which he use should reflect the light in interesting ways. He also used the patterns of box-pleating to create different patterns. Undoubtedly, his technique may be seen as a way of tessellating the paper, but only in a decorative pattern of creases and not by creating any developed structures.
Dave Brill’s second article was about John Emmett, who had recently introduced zig-zag folding to the British Origami Society, to the extent that at one convention the members almost abandoned any other kind of folding. Zig-zag folding was an old technique, which was known, for instance in Danish lampshades. But John Emmett showed just how rich its potentialities were. At the end of issue no. 90, and easily missed were instructions for “Boxes” by John Emmett. At the time I completely missed the significance of these instructions because they were not zig-zag folding, which I was then interested in. But, now, looked at with hindsight, “Boxes” is revealed as no less than a three-dimensional tessellation. It was very much before its time because three-dimensional tessellations were not generally developed until some time after the year 2000.
During the two weeks, I have been reviewing my file on zig-zag folding and have looked up BO no 90. Accidentally I came across the instructions for John Emmett’s “Boxes” and their importance struck me. I made a photocopy for my file on tessellations. Two days later the August, 2006 issue of British origami arrived. And, wonder of wonders, the editor, Nick Robinson had reproduced the instructions for “Boxes” as a ”Golden Oldie”. Sadly, John Emmett didn’t remain a member of the BOS for more than two or three years and we soon lost sight of him. At present his address is not known, but in view of this new discovery, I hope that it wil be possible to find him.
The third of Dave Brill’s articles in British Origami 91 for December, 1981 was even more important because it was about Shuzo Fujimoto. Dave must be given great credit for recognising, before anyone else, the significance of these new trends of “Twists, Pleats and Beams of Light”. By 1981, information about Shuzo Fujimoto was still very slow in filtering through to the West. His first book, “Twist Origami” was published privately in 1976 and was printed using a simple duplicator. It was never widely distributed, but a few cognoscenti in Western origami managed to obtain copies direct from Fujimoto. His best known book is the hard-back, “Soso Suru Origami Asobi” (“Invitation to Creative Origami Play”), which was published in 1982. Instructions for Fujimoto’s flat origami tessellations are given in “Twist Origami”, pages 34 to 38. Page 33 has illustrations of eight complicated flat tessellations of the sort that are best seen when held up to the light. Fujimoto gives many more flat tessellations in “Invitation to Creative Play” on pages 156 to 167 and also on the outer cover of the book. In the same book, pages 182 to 198 are devoted to zig-zag folding. It has to be said that Fujimoto’s zig-zag folding was advanced and considerably more so than that of John Emmett!
So, the tessellations in “Twist Origami” take the recorded origin of flat origami tessellations back to 1976. Nevertheless Fujimoto must have discovered them before he wrote “Twist Origami”. Indeed, because his examples are so advanced, his discovery must have been several years earlier.
The key to many (but not all) flat tessellations is the fold known as the “Twist”, named perhaps after the popular dance (but unrelated) of the 1960s. Two vertical pleats are placed at right angles in a sheet of paper to form a cross. The two vertical pleats necessarily conflict with each other and are difficult to lay down flat. The Twist is a way of resolving the problem. The arms of the “cross” are laid down in a clockwise (or anticlockwise”) direction, like a windmill. At the centre the twist is made and all four arms of the cross can be made to lie down neatly.
Twist folds of different kinds exist in traditional origami. The windmill and the traditional puzzle purse are traditional examples. Others are various kinds of tatos or purses. Chris Palmer spoke of his indebtedness to previous folders, including Fujimoto. He referred to the twist and mentioned Michio Uchiyama (the elder). Presumably he was referring to Uchiyama’s polygonal tatos which occupied his later paperfolding years.
However, the twist fold used in tessellations is a new variant. Where did it come from? There are two contenders. One is Fujimoto himself. But another possible claimant is the Japanese folder, Yoshihide Momotani. Momotani developed the twist for folding origami flowers and it is already demonstrated in his first book, “Origami Nyumon” (“The Guide Book of Origami”), which was published in 1971. Examples of the Twist fold are given on pages 108 to 110 (the puzzle purse) and on pages 202 to 203 where he gives an advanced twist fold. In his later books of origami flowers, Momotani made extensive use of the twist fold. Later it was also used by Kawasaki and other folders in the creation of origami roses.
Momotani’s book appeared in 1971, whereas Fujimoto’s “Twist Origami” appeared in 1976, so, on the basis of publication, Momotani must be given priority. But Fujimoto was the first to design flat tessellations which used the Twist fold, so he should be recognised as the first to use it in this context.
There are also flat tessellations which do not use the Twist fold. Rectilinear tessellations form a sub branch of the tessellations as a whole. The most notable of these is Momotani’s Wall, which he created for the purpose of building walls in his origami pictures. It also has the unusual characteristic that it can be stretched in two directions. The wall, however, was published some years after Twist Origami and was not the first flat origami tessellation.
On the evidence that I have so far adduced, Flat origami tessellations started with Fujimoto’s tessellations first published in his book “Twist Origami” in 1976. Fujimoto’s tessellations depended upon the Twist fold, which Momotani published in 1971, but which was discovered by Fujimoto independently about the same time. Credit for the discovery and creation of flat origami tessellations must be awarded to Fujimoto.
I accept that I may have missed other evidence and, as usual, I shall be very pleased to receive further evidence, even if it contradicts what I have written.

Tessellations
There are tessellations and tessellations. The word comes from the Greek for a small quadrilateral tablet used as a token or a tally. It became applied to the small stones used in mosaics and from these became applied to tiles used for floors or to decorate walls of buildings. The most advanced tiling of this kind was done by the peoples of Islam, because their religion forbade them to use representations of people or living creatures for decoration; and the finest of all Islamic tessellations are generally accepted to be those in the Alhambra Palace at Granada in southern Spain. As the word is used today, a tessellation is a pattern made up of separate tiles, sometimes of one shape and sometimes of a mixture of shapes.
There has been an extensive study of tiling patterns in mathematics and numerous books and papers have been written. The bible of the subject is the magnificent "Tilings and Patterns" by Branco Grimbaum and G.C. Shepherd, (It may still be in print, although I was astonished to get mine as a remaindered copy) and the High Priest of the subject in Roger Penrose, the Oxford don and writer about artificial intelligence, who (in his spare time) was the discover of non-periodic tiling patterns. Penrose contributed to a big symposium on Escher at Rome in March 1985 and was one of the editors of the simply splendid book of Proceedings.
Tessellations in paperfolding are somewhat different. They are not made up out of separate tiles, but out of a single sheet of paper. There are two principal stages. First a pattern is drawn or directly creased on the sheet of paper. Although this is not made up of separate tiles, it can, nevertheless, regarded as the pattern of a composition of separate tiles. Secondly, the paper is creased in mountain and valley folds along the lines of the primary pattern, and when this has been done, the paper is "collapsed" into a second tiling pattern, which appears quite different from the first pattern. The second pattern is usually two-dimensional, but three-dimensional forms can be folded. This is what is generally regarded as the completed paperfolded tiling pattern or tessellation. It is remarkable, because it still retains hidden within its folds the original tiling pattern! There is another bonus, too. If the paper used is semi-transparent, a third rich shadow pattern is revealed when the paper is held up to the light.
The principal western folders investigating paperfolded tiling patterns today are Chris Palmer and Tom Hull of the United States and Alex Bateman of England. Chris is an artist, while Tom and Alex are mathematicians.
The originator of this kind of paperfolded tessellation was Shuzo Fujimoto of Japan. It appears to have been discovered by him in the course of his investigations into what he called "Twist Origami". (Although the "twist" itself in paperfolding appears to have been discovered by Yoshihide Momotani somewhat earlier and used by him in his earlier books on folding flowers.)
Fujimoto is a school mathematics teacher and a delightful and approachable person. His book, "Twist Origami" was home-made and reproduced on a copying machine in 1976. Many of the models are abstract and flower patterns and it is possible to see them verging towards true tessellations. In addition, however, there is one page of illustrations of tessellations of the fully-developed kind. More tilings, some of them three-dimensional, appear in Fujimoto's "Twist origami 2", dated apparently 1983. Yet more appear in "Solid Origami" a professionally printed paperback of 1976. Fujimoto's most extensive treatment of tessellations is in "Sozo Suru Origami Asobi", a hard-backed book of 1982. This is one of the small number of truly great origami books, but it's distribution in the West has been very limited and sadly, I understand it is now unobtainable, though I hope I'm wrong in this. All of Fujimoto's books are in Japanese. Fuimoto himself discovered how to disclose the hidden patterns in the folding by using semitransparent paper and holding the completed pattern up to the light.
Notwithstanding the prevalence of origami tessellations folded from a single sheet of paper, another kind of tiling has been used in paperfolding. In this individual shapes are folded and then arranged in a pattern in exactly the same way as tiles are fitted together to form a floor-surface. It may have been done before, but the example with which I am most familiar came about in this way.
In his younger days, before the Second World War, Maurits Escher, the Dutch graphic artist (1898 - 1972) visited the Alhambra Palace and was immediately fascinated by the Moorish tiling patterns which pervade the building. He studied them closely, and made copies. Subsequently he devised his own very imaginative pictorial tiling patterns, often building them into works of remarkable imagination. The vogue for Escher's work (which is still continuing) started in the early 1970s and in April 1975, the spring convention of the British Origami Society was held in London. Visiting Foyle's bookshop, I came across "The Graphic Work of M.C.Escher". I had never before seen anything like it and I promptly bought it. I was keen to show it to other members of the Society (at breakfast, I think!) and it was an immediate hit. Everyone who saw it was enthusiastic and Escher obviously appealed to the "origami mind". Mick Guy (now the president of the BOS), in particular was fascinated, especially by the periodic tiling patterns, and he began to reproduce similar patterns from folded paper. It was not easy to get the subtle angles right, but he achieved some success.
Then in 1976 the Arts Council of Great Britain held an important and impressive exhibition of Islamic Art in London and it featured charts showing the mathematical basis of Islamic tiling. About the time of the exhibition, the was a rush of remarkable books on the subject of Islamic patterns, some of which I bought. Mick Guy visited me and studied them closely to try to find new patterns which could be reproduced in paperfolding. So successful was Mick that he had several of his origami tessellations framed and hung them about his house in Birmingham. (I have one on my wall - Web Ed.) The became a regular feature of BOS exhibitions. So far as I know, nobody else took up this kind of folding with any great enthusiasm and eventually Mick, himself, tired of it.
Mick's tilings were, of course, very different from those of Fujimoto and his followers. But it would be a pity if this fascinating backwater of origami were to be forgotten. Someone might still like to take it up again. As for Escher, there have been numerous books. One of the best on his tiling patterns is "Visions of Symmetry - M.C, Escher" by Doris Schattschneider, published by Freeman in 1990.

World Tessellation day
June 17th is World Tessellation day!
So we’ve added what is probably the most classic tessellation model to our diagrams – the Hydrangea by Shuzu Fujimoto.
You can access the diagram by John Smith here:
If you’ve never folded it before, John’s diagrams maybe the best around – each step has been carefully drawn in a unique photographic style.
2022 is the centenary of the birth of the great origamist Shuzu Fujimoto. His  pioneering designs revoluntionised origami and the models have inspired countless folders and creators.

