Tant Review
If Elephant Hide is the Mega Star of the paper world, then Tant is the solid all-rounder, second in command, ready when needed. Made in Japan by Hokuetsu Kishu Paper Co. and distributed by Toyo Co., this may be the most versatile paper for origami uses. Little is known about this paper, but we do know that the pulp for it is either imported to Japan from the USA and Canada or made in Japan from Australian Eucalyptus Wood. It is then dyed and shipped to Toyo Co. to be cut, packed and sold. The paper is not acid-free! Good for almost every kind of folding, it is light-weight with relatively high strength, an amazing color palette, and a large variety of sizes. This is an origami paper made for origamists, and it even comes with diagrams for a variety of models.
The Crane from a 15cm×15cm square. It was a pleasure to fold. The weight of the paper allows accurate creases with little effort. The square is perfectly cut. Nothing to complain. The result is very nice and shaped easily.
This paper is too soft for the dog. After playing a bit with the model, all creases needed reinforcement.
The pull mechanism of the flapping bird works nicely. The wings stand firm and in position when untouched, and the flapping action is even with full movements up and down.
The frog jumps a distance of 30cm to 50cm and summersaults two to three times. It is an average performance for this action model.

This is a perfect paper for modular work and particularly for this model. Puffing the units was easy, thanks to a surprisingly high bending resistance. The paper is also strong enough to hold a structure of 30 units and at this size it was very easy to get very accurate folding. The roughness of the surface creates a lot of friction, and the color palette allows having beautiful combinations. This is definitely my preferred paper for modular!
The paper surface is attractive for this model. And it holds the cube closed very well.
This paper is great for tessellators, almost perfect, but there are some limitations (see Mystery section). It is very easy to fold a very accurate grid; no real pressure is needed to make a sharp crease. Reversing a fold to make the grid bi-directional is again, quite easy, and the paper breaks on the right place with just a little pressure. Pre folding is very clean, where short fold lines have little effect on the surrounding surface, so the final result is quite clean. This paper is not as strong as EH, which does make lesser stress on the fingers. With around 80 GSM, the thickness of the paper is great for multi layers, and it's still easy to fold 3 and even 5 layers together as can be seen in my variation of the Pineapple tessellation.
Mystery tessellation shows the limitations of Tant. I tried to make it from a full scale paper (110cm×80cm), with a 48X64 grid. For this model there is a twist fold that requires a lot of bending resistance. With EH, the paper just snapped into position. Here the Tant crumpled under the pressure to a degree that could not be handled. I had to give up on this model at that size of a molecule (about 2cm). Nevertheless, I needed this pattern to show the transparency effects, so I have folded it from a 15cm paper, with 16×16 grid, making only 4 molecules. At this size the paper behaved a bit better. As mentioned before, back-lighting works nicely with Tant, even with the darker colors such as red and blue.
One of this paper advantages is its memory - how it holds the creases. But with multi-layered models it becomes a disadvantage! Since it is relatively thick, flat surfaces become rippled as can be seen on the neck of the Pegasus. Although the folds hold very well and the final model looks nice, I strongly recommend using thinner paper for complex models.
Unlike Elephant Hide, which gave me a fight, Tant is much more responsive. The creases went smoothly, no need for more than my fingernails to stabilize the creases. At 35cm the details are nicely formed, although making the wing and reverse folding the legs was a little struggle. Again, I failed with the details of the legs; I couldn't make the hooves to be acceptable, there are too many layers for this thickness of a paper.
The Rat mixed straight lines with curved ones. I tried to make it more curved by wetting the model. Unfortunately, the Rat's back tore! The paper is too weak. To shape the tail I didn't need to wet it even a bit, and just by rolling it on my finger it shaped well. The ears shaped easily by pinching them in the centre.
For wet folding, I wetted an 18cm square which had a small effect on the proportions of the paper, so the Fox Terrier didn't suffer for it too much. At the end the model was nice but wet and soft. I had to watch it while it was drying to reshape it till it dried. The final model is nice and shaped, but it feels too soft. My expectation from wet folding models is that the final dry model should be hard. I can't really recommend using this paper for wet folding, although it looks fine and holds its shape; I still don't like the final result.
What is it good for? For traditional use it is great. If I could afford it, Tant would be my only paper for simple 2D models, it's pure fun paper. For tessellations it is more than suitable, but do bear in mind its relatively weak bending resistance. For 3D models, it's good, but for wet folding it is too thin. Complex models will get a good result if you choose big enough paper and there's a great color palette to choose from. The variety of small sizes, the friction and paper texture make Tant perfect for Modular Origami. This paper is not to be wasted on action models.
This is highly versatile paper and is recommended for both beginner and advanced folders. Going through Flickr search engine after Tant images, I got around 415 images. The majority (220) is 3D models, including complex and high intermediate models. Surprisingly, modulars are only 10% and tessellations covers 25%.
Bottom line: Recommended for all folders, best for modulars.
Please write your comments and feedback directly to the authors:
I was surprised by how thick and resistant this paper is. Compared with Kami it feels like light card. It's a lovely colour and I'm sure I'll come to enjoy using it but it's very different from what I'm used to. I think it's the matt texture and lack of a white back but I find it quite difficult to see the top layer against the bottom layer so I find it hard to fold as accurately as I usually fold kami and multiple thicknesses get pretty thick pretty quickly, particularly with 150mm squares.

Water Bomb (Eric Gjerde): Instructions
Update: I was made aware of the fact that Ron Resch discovered this origami tessellation before Eric Gjerde. I have updated the list of designers on this page accordingly. I fear the credits in the video are harder to fix...
This might be the easiest model presented it the book "Origami @Tessellations" by Eric Gjerde. It basically is a agglomeration of waterbomb bases, which leads to a visually pleasing result.
hi sara how many grid divisions dose the one you made have the one with a bunch of squares?
That's one with 16ths in the beginning.
Thanks so much for a wonderful tutorial!! I have finally successfully folded a tesselation. I have tried many times but have given up before anything came out of it. Thanks for the help!!
Linda
I think an origami artist named Mark Leonard had posted a crease pattern on the origami forum.  That was where I got the diagrams.  Also, there is a slanted crease pattern.  The normal crease pattern has the result of the squares aligning into a 22.5 degree grid.  The slanted crease pattern has the result of the squares lining up into a 90 degree grid.
Another great video. I really appreciate that I can start the video, find a piece of paper, begin to follow along in a steady pace not trying to rush things, and 17 minutes later I have finished a nice-looking tesselation while listening to your final insight comments.
unable to view the complete video even after repeated tries.
What was the size of paper you used to make that brown waterbomb tessellation?
I used a 19.5cm square of relatively heavy paper (115gsm). I think you should easily be able to fold it from a 15cm square, too, though.
Thank you again Sara for the video :)
You can find my finished model on my blog: http://www.almightyb...
Those look great! And you went a bit crazy with doing grids with more divisions, didn't you? ;)
Hahaha yeah ^_^ and I almost didn't finish :) I used really thick card paper, such a pain to fold ^_^ But I finished anyway... it honestly doesn't look as good when you see it in person (good thing you're way over there and I'm over here hehehe) thanks again for the video.  Have you thought about what video to do next?
Well, the Jack in the Box was heavily requested, so maybe that. I'm more keen on the following models though: Star Puff (Ralf Konrad), Snowflake (Dennis Walker), Star Box (Robin Glynn) -- they can all be used quite nicely as Christmas decoration, so doing those should fit well into doing them this time of the year. Ah, we shall see. Maybe I'll manage to do all 4 models this year.
Yea, those would be a good idea for the upcoming holidays. Most of my families Christmas decorations are hand-made by us, or cut out from cereal boxes for example. It would be nice to have some origami in the mix too.
When i want to fold a 16division one i get stuck with the diagonals.
I have no idea how to start with those crease.
I'm not sure what you could be stuck on. Just like with 8 divisions, put the first X in a corner, then proceed as seen in the video until the while grid is filled with Xs. Hope this helps
How do you get your brown waterbomb tessellation in a neat round shape.
will that shape depend upon the size of paper you use?
Or does it depend upon the precision of folds?
What is the grid size used for this? Is it 16 by 16 grid?
I guess it depends on the paper you use. Machine-made paper will probably curl much more in one direction than the other, because the paper fibres are aligned, whereas hand-made paper should curl more evenly.
My red waterbomb tessellation now curls a lot in one direction, but not the other, but at the beginning it was still quite balanced. I did use a 16 by 16 grid, yes.
You can of course start with a rectangle and then make a grid that has more rows or columns. Just be sure that each grid square is - well, a square.
Got it from the first try!!
Hi Sara,
I am a total novice and I completed a 16 division water bomb last night (took me almost 3 hours).  I just want to say: Thank You!  Your instructional videos are spectacular.  You have a real talent for teaching Origami.
what video are you going to make next
I think it'll be Roman Diaz's vixen: http://www.happyfold...

hi sara!
superb tutorial..wanted to ask if there is any method for tessellating Triangles instead of Squares in the similar fashion?
Perhaps you want to try out this tessellation: http://www.flickr.co...
A link to a crease pattern is also included: http://www.ics.uci.e...

the folding part is very hard . i tried over i7 times. any idea what went wrong???
More information about text formats

Triphilia Tessellation: Instructions
Paper used in this video: hexagon with a height of 18 cm (7 in)
Finished model: hexagon with a height of 9 cm (3 1/2 in)
This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami tessellation "Triphilia" discovered by Robin Scholz. Robin kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
More information about text formats

Time Lapse: "Big Star" tessellation (Melina "Yureiko" Hermsen)
Paper: hexagon with a diameter of 32.5 cm, kami
Model: "hexagon" with a diameter of 20.25 cm

Here, I fold a hexagonal sheet of kami (origami paper) into the tessellation "Big Star" designed by Melina "Yureiko" Hermsen.
Actual folding time: 1 hour 45 minutes

Music: "Life of Riley" by Kevin MacLeod 
Life of Riley by Kevin MacLeod is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution license (https://creativecomm...)
Source: http://incompetech.c...
Artist: http://incompetech.c...
More information about text formats

Folding "Big Star" tessellation (Melina "Yureiko" Hermsen): real-time (1.75 hours)
Paper: hexagon with a diameter of 32.5 cm, kami
Model: "hexagon" with a diameter of 20.25 cm
Do you enjoy watching and listening to someone folding paper? Then this video is for you! There's no talking, only the paper being creased speaks. :)
Here, I fold a hexagonal sheet of kami (origami paper) into the tessellation "Big Star" designed by Melina "Yureiko" Hermsen.
More information about text formats

Time-Lapse: 1-Cube Exercise Tessellation (Alessandro Beber)
Paper used in this video: hexagon with a side length of 10.5 cm (4 1/8 in) and a diameter of 21 cm (8 1/4 in), kami
Finished model: hexagon with a side length of 5.25 cm (2 1/16 in) and a diameter of 10.5 cm (4 1/8 in)

This video shows how I fold a fantastic origami tessellation called "1-Cube Exercise" designed by Alessandro Beber.
Alessandro kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.

Actual folding time: 1 hour 45 minutes (including explanations)

Music:
Carefree by Kevin MacLeod is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution license (https://creativecomm...)
Source: http://incompetech.c...
Artist: http://incompetech.com/
More information about text formats

Time-Lapse: Low Density Hydrangea Tiling tessellation (Shuzo Fujimoto and Peter Budai)
Paper: square with a side length of 24 cm (9 1/2 in)

Model: side length of 12 cm (4 3/4 in)


Here, I fold a square sheet of kami (origami paper) into a tessellation consisting of multiple hydrangeas designed by Shuzo Fujimoto. It represents a low density tiling, as presented by Peter Budai.


Actual folding time: 1 hour 20 minutes

Playlist of origami time-lapses: https://www.youtube....

Music: "Carefree" by Kevin MacLeod 
Carefree by Kevin MacLeod is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution license (https://creativecomm...)

Source: http://incompetech.c...
Artist: http://incompetech.com/
More information about text formats

Folding Low Density Hydrangea Tiling tessellation (Fujimoto and Budai): real-time (1 hour 20 minutes)
Paper: square with a side length of 24 cm (9 1/2 in)
Model: side length of 12 cm (4 3/4 in)

Do you enjoy watching and listening to someone folding paper? Then this video is for you! There's no talking, only the paper being creased speaks. :)

Here, I fold a square sheet of kami (origami paper) into a tessellation consisting of multiple hydrangeas designed by Shuzo Fujimoto. It represents a low density tiling, as presented by Peter Budai.
想要看教程
The tutorial is here.
More information about text formats

Origami "Tessellation Recommendations: What to Fold June 2015
Have you always wanted to try out folding a tessellation, or are you perhaps already totally in love with them? Then try folding these 10 tessellations following tutorials from other YouTubers!
More information about text formats

Celtic Circle Tessellation (Robin Scholz)
Paper: hexagon with a height of 24 cm (9.5 in), blue Elephant Hide
Model: hexagon with a height of 17.5cm (7 in)

This shows the model's front and reverse in normal lighting, as well as backlit.
Hello Sara! Wonderful fold as always! I was just curious on how to fold the 96 division grid. After a 64 division grid there is a 128 division grid. How do you get 96?
I fold into thirds first, then divide each third into 32 equal parts.
More information about text formats

Celtic Circle Tessellation: Instructions
Paper used in this video: hexagon with a height of 18 cm (7 in)
Finished model: near-hexagon with a height of about 12.5 cm (4 7/8 in)

This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami tessellation "Celtic Circle" discovered by Robin Scholz. Robin kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
I did in 2006 , I think not all credit goes to him
https://www.flickr.com/photos/niwatori/233806259/in/album-72157594444269...
https://www.flickr.com/photos/niwatori/233806292/in/album-72157594444269...
YAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAYY TESSELATIONS!!!!
More information about text formats

Five-and-Four (Eric Gjerde): Instructions
Paper used in this video: square with a side length of 24 cm (9 1/2/ in)
Finished model: square with a side length of 15 cm (6 in)
This is my very first tessellation. :D I did this model the night before a violent typhoon rampaged the house last year...One of my favorite tessellations, I could say. :)
wow.
More information about text formats

Celtic Circle Tessellation (Robin Scholz): backlit
Paper: hexagon with a height of 24 cm (9.5 in), blue Elephant Hide
Model: hexagon with a height of 17.5cm (7 in)

This is a tessellation of the celtic circle molecule. It's folded on a 96 division grid.
one question how do you make the 96 division grid
I know you made this comment ages ago, but a 96 division grid can be made by folding into thirds and then folding the thirds in half to make sixths and again to make twelfths, twenty-fourths, forty-eighths and finally ninety-sixths.
More information about text formats

Stardream Paper Review
It all started because of aging; my aging! I had gone to a class to learn how to fold the Flower Tower by Chris Palmer, but forgot to bring my Elephant Hide. My teacher gave me a shiny light purple sheet of paper that I hadn't seen before, and I knew I had to review it.
It is made in Italy by Gruppo Cordenons, who have two paper mills - the Cordenons mill and the Valsugana mill. The first has been producing paper since 1630 and was the official supplier to the Republic of Venice. The Valsugana mill was built in 1715, owned by influential Venetian families. Both mills were acquired and renovated by the Gilberti family in 1975. They have specialized in the production of high-quality fine papers ever since.
Cordenons is FSC-certified (Forest Stewardship Council) and a charter member of UNESCO's “Trust the Forest” program. All Gruppo Cordenons' products are recyclable and more than 80% of the cellulose comes from either ISO 14001 or FSC-certified companies to guarantee it comes only from responsibly-managed forests.
Stardream is a thick paper from the origamist's point of view. With its metallic finish and smooth surface, it's an unusual, sophisticated paper, and our sixth paper to be reviewed. Unlike many of the other papers so far, it is no celebrity paper, and far from being known as well as the others. It's definitely far from being the first choice for most folders. Is it worth trying out, or does it need some more stardust? Here is what we found.
It was easier than expected to get a sharp beak and tail. I had left some space when I narrowed them, so reverse folding them brought them to the exact place. A good result.
This paper works well for all three action models.
The push mechanism for the dog made formidable barks.
The thickness of the paper made for balanced and strong flapping for the bird.
The springiness resulted in the frog making many somersaults (but only short distance jumps).
Folding the grid was very easy. This paper is soft and folds easily. Reversing the grid was almost unnecessary as the creases simply bent back in the other direction. Pre-creases were also very easy to do. There was also very little effect on the surface surrounding the end of a crease, ensuring a flat surface where no creases are needed. Collapsing was also surprisingly easy. The "Snap!" effect is strong and the final result looks very clean and sharp. Even the final step, making six reverse folds in every little pineapple, was effortless.
Using  almost double the recommended size, I felt that this should go well. I reinforced every crease with a bone folder and went through the stages quite quickly. At step 31 a disaster happened. When trying to pull out an inner flap the paper got stuck. With just a little bit of extra force the paper tore; a long tear in the paper which was stopped by the next fold line. Step 37, sinking the belly, was painless, maybe the easiest sink I have folded from all the reviews so far. But later steps weren't so easy. Reversing the rear legs was a struggle; the many layers were hard to maneuver. Thinning the belly was even harder, and the fine details of the legs - terrible! Surprisingly, the final result is not that bulbous, but well proportioned.
This model worked very well. The paper is heavier than Elephant Hide, but easier to handle - the first crease goes in easily and reversing it takes almost no effort at all. Despite its thickness, it folded accurately. Puffing was the best part. It molded exactly as it should, a benefit of the paper's high surface tension derived from its thickness.
The paper is far too thick for this model. Multi layered folds are almost impossible. But at least the paper didn't tear.
Using the lavish red paper, I decided to fold this classic rose. This strong paper keeps its final pose beautifully. Sharp creases will last and soft creases can be corrected  or shaped surprisingly easily.
This one page, eight step model is flat until the last step. Folding through the first seven steps was a piece of cake with no shortcomings from the thickness. Going 3D at the last step was perfect with and without wet folding. The head was finalized just by dry folding, but the legs and back needed some touches of water to make them stay. Drying was very fast as just a little water is needed. The legs do tend to splay a little, but not too much.
A new model in our review and sure to be a classic wet folding model. If you are careful with the moisture level and the paper becomes just soft, it is easily shaped. Apply a little too much moisture (and I do mean a little) and you lose the smooth surface. After drying, the shape holds firmly.
I was pleasantly surprised by Stardream. It's a hidden star indeed. Easy pre-creasing and the ‘pop' into place make it ideal for @tessellations. Modulars benefit from the high surface tension, although the smoothness may be a disadvantage when connecting units by friction. 3D models and traditional flat models both had very satisfactory final results but required quite a lot of strength from the folder. Wet folding was slightly tricky, but we tested a light weight paper for wet folding, so apply moisture only as required. Complex models are too much for this paper but good results can be obtained when attempting intermediate to high-intermediate models.
Searching flickr, I found 184 images mentioning Stardream. Only 14 folders are using (or at least declare using) this paper. I counted 27 tessellations and around 20 variations of Chris Palmer's Flower Tower. The rest are mostly boxes, vases and geometrical shapes. Only 5 modular models, one complex model, and 12 intermediate animals.
We feel this paper has a lot of potential, and deserves to be investigated by more folders.
Bottom line: A rising star!
the paper is so pretty. how can i get the paper?
She cite the places  where you can actually buy this amazing high quality paper.
By a stunning coincidence, I recently started selling squares of this paper on etsy.  
http://www.etsy.com/...

Right now I only have 4 and 6 inch squares, but I can make larger sizes available, if there is interest.  For the time being at least, I only have five colors.  If there is demand, I may acquire others.

I've been enjoying this paper a lot, as at least 17 of the models tagged on flickr are mine.  
http://www.flickr.co...

malachi
I just recently found this paper in a local art shop, so I had to buy a few sheets to test.  Today I went back and bought 30 more sheets because it is so wonderful!  I only managed to find 24 colors, and only in 8 1/2in by 11in size, but that is fine.
Suprisingly, this is the only paper good for origami that I can find in local paper stores and art shops in the USA.  So if you're looking to try this paper in the USA, call your closest paper shop!  (So far I have found it at Sam Flax and Paper Affair)
Oh, you might need to call it "double-sided metallic paper" when you ask though, or else the shop might not know what you're talking about.

Triangle Grid: Instructions
I really forgot how to make a hexagon from a square. could you maybe make a video showing how to?
Check happyfolding.com/term-hexagon 


Dear Sara,
I saw many origami tessellations photos on flicker of Eric Gjerde and many more origami artist.  I wanted to learn there techniques for quite sometimes.  I searched on a web a lot but couldn't able to move any were.
Couple of weeks before I just decided, I want to do at least one origami tessellation on that day.  And first think came in to my mind is to check happyfolding web site.  And I found these videos.  I was very happy at that movement.  Thank you.
Following is link to my picasa web album, in which I made three origami tessellation using triangle twist, square twist and hexagon twist.  These are not at all properly made tessellations (may not very interesting for others) but these are my first attempt and first step of origami @tessellation.
http://picasaweb.goo...
I would also like to thank Prof. Eric Gjerde for his "@Tessellation basic booklet.
Thanks again for videos.
Best regards,
Archana.
You've got some very cleanly folded models there. Congratulations! I think it's also really good that you are experimenting with the basic techniques to get some nice patterns. That's probably what's so intriguing about @tessellations, too. You can easily make your own pattern by just combining different basics. Of course, the art lies in finding interesting combinations and the less obvious ones.

Konnichiwa
when i saw this site i very glad that technique is spreading .
doo itashi masitae
Dear Sara
I am 16 years old and have been doing origami for about a year now, but I am not that great at it. I mean, the hardest thing I have managed perfectly would be a seal on a rock from a single sheet of brown/white paper, thanks to a book of mine. (Unfortunately as of yet I don't have a flickr stream to show you.) However, your videos have been the greatest help, thanks to the considerable amount of detail and effort you manage to put in.
The reason for my leaving a comment here is to request you to do a few more @tessellation videos, as I find them the most visual appealing, not taking into consideration insanely complex models like those of Robert J.Lang or Satoshi Kamiya (I hope that is his correct name). I was hoping you could make a video of something more from Eric Gjerde's work, as the book is most probably not available in India.
Anyway, I would still like to thank you for your videos.
Best regards,
Varun
I do plan to make more @tessellation videos. However, the next couple of videos I want to make won't be on @tessellations. So I fear the next @tessellation video won't be up until a couple more months. You can try to fold some from crease pattern, if you like, but it's of course a bigger challenge. Eric Gjerde has quite a few crease patterns on his website, though: http://www.origamite...


Dear Varun,
"Origami @Tessellations: Awe-Inspiring Geometric Designs- Eric Gjerde" is available in India.  I recently ordered it from International Book Agency, Nirala Nagar, Lucknow-226020 (email: iba@bsnl.in).   It price is Rs, 1,275 with discount I got it for Rs. 1,020.
Best wishes,
Archana Morye.
Thank You very much for the information! I will definitely order the book.
Ps- For Ms Adams, I appreciate that you bothered to reply, and I look forward to seeing your future videos.
Thanking you both very much,
Varun Sen
can you do a video on the open back hex twist or rabbait ear sink
Hello Sara,
First, I just wanted to express my thanks to all that you've done here. I'm personally a huge fan of your work, and can safely say that >50% of all the models I've ever folded have come from either your videos, or from books that I've purchased after first seeing designs that you folded from them. Keep the the tremendous work!!
I also wanted to ask you for a bit of advice. I'm having some struggles with the accuracy of my triangle grids. I can create one of 16 divisions no problem, but as soon as I go for a 32-grid, my accuracy goes out the window, no matter how long and deliberate I fold it. This is especially annoying on the trickier models in Eric Gjerde's book. Imagine folding Aztec Twist on a considerably-off triangle grid! How do you fold your larger division grids with such beautiful precision? I'm in awe.
Thanks so much!
~ Christoph
Hm, not sure, I've found it no harder to fold accurate grids with higher divisions. I haven't done any more than 64 divisions, fyi. This is what might help:
For small divisions I fold edge to edge, creating lots of pleats. When I work with higher numbers of divisions, I make a couple of pleats, unfold those and then start the next set of pleats. Like this there are never too many layers of paper on top of each other, which makes working precisely harder. Paper choice is also important. I find it much easier to work precisely with translucent paper, because rather than aligning edges, I can indeed align creases. The translucent paper I have has quite prominent creases, and the translucency thus allows me to see the creases through a layer of paper.
Another reference might be not to necessarily align edges for higher divisions, but really using the existing grid lines. And the order in which you crease is also important. I first make a full grid of 8 (all three directions), then expand it to 16, then to 32, etc. If you first do all divisions for one direction, then the paper will have a significantly different size in that direction. Getting the other directions done precisely is then harder. Always remember that the paper size changes when you add creases. Adding lots of creases will show how significant those changes are when they add up.
Hope this helps a bit,

Thanks for such a detailed reply! I think one of the major issues with my grids of that I folded 32 divisions all in one direction, then started from scratch on the other side. I can see how this would change the paper size in one direction. I was also making huge amounts of pleats back and forth on the larger divisions, which by the end, only about half lined up properly =)
I will most definitely implement these fixes on my next tessellation. Thanks again for your great help!
~ Christoph
I think one of the major issues with my grids of that I folded 32 divisions all in one direction, then started from scratch on the other side. You can easily make your own pattern by just combining different basics. Of course, the art lies in finding interesting combination and the less obvious ones. Thank you.
I think one of the major issues with my grids of that I folded 32 divisions all in one direction, then started from scratch on the other side. I can see how this would change the paper size in one direction. I was also making huge amounts of pleats back and forth on the larger divisions. Thank you for the tips that you share.
More information about text formats

Efalin Review
As a tessellator, I admit that I love Elephant Hide, but I am always looking for other options. Unfortunately, there are not that many good, thick (but foldable) papers out there. One candidate however is Efalin, made by Zanders from Germany – yes, the same company that brought us Elephant Hide.
Unsurprisingly, it is not intended as an origami paper. Far from it! It is mainly used for book-binding, and as such, it is strong, durable, resistant to dirt and moisture, it has a lovely finish and can be wiped clean!
But it is thick! Thicker than EH or any other paper we have tested so far, which does raise a question when one considers using it for origami. 
On the other hand, it has a lively palette of colors and it is wood-free and acid-free: all properties to indicate that it might be quite good for origami.
But there is only one way to decide how good it is, so we took out our scalpels, turned on the flash lights and set to work.
This paper fights back. Some extra force is needed to get all the sharp points you want. I immediately switched to my bone folder to have this extra power. Folds reverse easily, and puffing the centre back is done without effort.
The flapping bird flaps consistently with even movements of the wings. There were no signs of tears or fatigue in the paper; the wings kept coming back to the desired position again and again. You get a sense of a very long lasting model here.
The frog jumps amazingly far. The tension of the 12 layers in the legs is overwhelming and the frog is released like a shot out of a cannon!
The Angry Fish requires red and black paper. I colored the red linen paper with black Folk Art water color. Painted, the paper feels and looks like leather, yet it still folds like paper. Predictably, the result is sturdy and works perfectly; it puffs immediately, and the push-pull mechanism is highly reliable. We have both beauty and strength here!
Folding the 26 by 26 grid was a struggle. The paper resists at first and then gives up in a very definite way. The inner side, when flattened, has a visible bump. With @tessellations the most important property is the behavior through the collapse. This paper, being thick, is also a little too stiff for my taste. It made me a little clumsy and, through the first stage of the collapse, I made too many wrinkles. However, the second phase benefited from this stiffness, as flaps jumped into position with little effort.
First, I folded a 32 division grid. This took some effort when breaking the fibers, but was significantly easier when folding with the grain. Reversing all the fold lines of the grid demonstrates an interesting behavior; it's not easy to reverse, but when the paper does break, it breaks on the mark. Folding the molecules is easy. The paper is thick, but this isn't a problem in this phase, it even helps as the paper is sturdy and breaks only where needed. Puffing the triangles was highly satisfying. Almost no misfires, all but one became flat and perfectly aligned to the others.
This paper screams Tessellate me!, so I tried one more. Folding the grid and the pre-creases went well. Some of the pre-creases are not done directly on the fold, but with two layers of paper on top of it. Using a bone folder, those also went well. The collapse showed the springiness of the paper, and the puffing went perfectly.
The zig zag pattern needs sharp angles. It wasn't hard to fold it, but collapsing it showed the paper's limits. In these corners the paper broke and lost its surface tension, and from there it went downhill. It couldn't be fixed. Nevertheless, in the final model the pattern is still visible, and it even looks nice, but I wasn't really happy with it.
I used the new linen texture; see the image for how lovely it looks. This texture totally changes the behavior of the paper. All the imprints make the paper softer and more responsive to folding. It is as if the paper had been scored in advance. The first steps, making the grid and getting to the base, were easy, like 90gsm paper and not the 120gsm it actually is! The paper is still thick, though, and when you have to make a crease through six layers (step 34), this cannot be done accurately and must be done by folding the layers two by two.  Thickness becomes even more of a problem when trying to get the small details. The tail has 12 crimps; I only managed six. On the good side, the paper has a memory similar to foil and all the wing details hold surprisingly well.
Using two different textures; fine linen and new linen, the immediate feel is stiffness and springiness. The linen texture makes it even harder to fold (as you need to break all curves in the paper). The fold lines are highly visible. Wooden pins are required during assembly, but when all is in place, the friction as well as the sturdiness gives a stable model.
I didn't dare to try it from 15 cm. During most of the stages, you ask yourself why should you fold it from such a thick paper, especially when you get to the ears and have to squash fold eight layers. But then, after going through it all and you start to shape it, it's amazing - the 3D shaping is achieved with such ease! It was not a bad experience, but I needed to use my bone folder often, which helped a lot. The final model is totally worth it!
This is a geometrical model and I thought it would be a good candidate for such a thick paper. But I was disappointed to see that it was too thick. The corners are far from sharp and the final shape looks sloppy.
The texture does give the feeling that it is thinner than it really is. I managed to fold the model easily through most stages, but finalizing the model was difficult and I can't say I am happy with the result.
First steps went well, until a speed bump in step 15, when you have to squash fold a flap. The paper resisted this move and I got a long crumple instead of a fold line. I had no such trouble with thinner paper. From there on the thickness is no longer an issue and sculpting the model into its full 3D shape is easy. The lock, based on two edges of the paper stuck on each other, benefits from the thickness and stiffness.
I had no white paper, so this one is a blue polar bear. I used the smooth texture. The paper doesn't absorb much water and drops were left on the surface. When wet, the paper does curl a little. Shaping with the wet paper is very easy, but it is doubtful whether it's necessary, since the paper can hold form even when it is dry folded. After drying, the new form is very stable, but the surface is a little wrinkled.
Thick papers are bound to have weight issues.  We all prefer thin, elegant papers that yield to our will and fingers. This is not that kind of a paper. It fights back, and you need time and patience to train it. But when it is tamed, you will get interesting results.
This may be the most divisive report so far. Gadi doesn't like it at all, saying it is way too thick, but I found it to be intriguing and usable.
Why should you buy it?
Efalin is great for 3D animals and models. It stays in place without the need to wet it, and if you do, you get even better results. For @tessellations it is highly appealing, with a wide color palette, and very good behavior, both through the pre folds, and the collapse. For action models it is exceptionally good! It will work again and again without any fatigue signs. Modulars will benefit from high friction, although I can't see anyone cutting it to 7.5 cm squares to make a nice globe; too much hassle and it won't work at that size. For complex models it is not suitable, unless you go really big!
On Flickr, I found only 30 images of Efalin, mostly with tessellations and mostly from Germany!. Also some boxes, 3D roses, two animals and a single modular. It may not say much, but it looks like Efalin isn't widely known in the origami world.
For those who are looking for a sturdy paper that will last and has bright and dominant colors, this is definitely a good choice. For those who vote for details, sharp visuals, and working on small scale models this is definitely the wrong paper.
Bottom line: thick and strong, but still foldable!

Water Bomb (Eric Gjerde)
Update: I was made aware of the fact that Ron Resch discovered this origami tessellation before Eric Gjerde. I have updated the list of designers accordingly.
This model somewhat reminds me of a hedgehog. It's basically a tessellation consisting of many small waterbomb bases.
Paper: 19.5cm square of stiff paper, 115gsm
Model: 11cm x 11cm x 1cm when pressed flat
yeah you're right! it does look like a hedgehog.  by the way, the crease pattern can be found on the origami forum by Mark Leonard:
http://snkhan.co.uk/...
that's really cool! it's great how it's more 3d than just tesselaty.
Does it have the same principles as the the traditional water bombs do?
(such as holding water for a sufficient time, in which allows it to be thrown against some one)
It's not a closed shape, so .... no.
hi Sara will you please make a video on this model?
Would you make a video about how to make more waterbombs because i could see that there is more squares on this one than the one on the video you made.
It's the same technique, just start with a grid that has more divisions.

by what i understand a tessellation
is an origami that can be repeated
know my origami doesnt look like a tessellation, but neither does the apple (that is why i asked)
well i am my able to make origami from a 32 and 64 (and hopefully a 16...)
would that count my origami as a tessellation?
This is totally taken out of context. Which model are you speaking of? :)
In any case, the apple by Shuzo Fujimoto isn't really a tessellation, but it's a tessellation-style apple. As to the exat definition of tessellations - you may also say that the clover folding and the hydrangea aren't tessellations. But does it *really* matter what the exact definition is? I'd say just enjoy folding, and don't worry too much about how to define the different areas of origami - there will always be an overlap and gray areas. :)

I know this is probably going to sound dumb,but do you know if there is such a thing called a waterbomb?Also,why is the base called a watebomb in the first place?I'm just curious is all.
There's a waterbomb model, which you can actually fill with water and throw. The waterbomb base is how you start the waterbomb model. As with most bases, they're named after a well-known model that starts with that base. Hope this clarifies it.
Check http://dev.origami.c... for diagrams for the full waterbomb model.


i would really like this if i could print a cp without buying this book
More information about text formats

Six Simple Twists: The Pleat Pattern Approach to Origami Tessellation Design

Hydrangea Tiles (Shuzo Fujimoto and Peter Budai): Instructions
Paper used in this video: 24 cm square of kami (9 1/2 in)
Finished model (low density tiling): side length of 12 cm (4 3/4 in)

This video describes how to fold different origami tessellations, all tiling of the Hydrangea designed by Shuzo Fujimoto. In particular, it explains how to fold a low, intermediate, and high density tiling, as well as further variations. I first learned about this technique from Peter Budai's tiling guide.

Shuzo Fujimoto and Peter Budai kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
Thank you, it's wonderful!
More information about text formats

@Tessellation Guide on Bricks (Ilan Garibi)
Recommended paper: Tant, e.g. 35cm (13.75in) squares available at:
Amazon offer for binder clips
This video gives a guide to putting together tessellations. It works on the example of "Bricks" by Ilan Garibi, and a variation of mine, which I'll call "Big Bricks". Ilan Garibi kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
Sorry, I uploaded the wrong video at first. Now everything should be up and working!

I think your different way of making a video was great! Although, I think to me it was a bit confusing. I think talking about two different things in on one video is too complicated.
if you were marking the .... I guess you could say the middle of the twist for the real bricks how would you do it. ( Like for your variation you move 4 and up 3)
I'm not sure I understand your question correctly. Is this about how to place the marks for the not-quite-central squares of the bricks molecule when working on a large grid? You can look at the crease pattern to figure this out best, I believe.

I love when things have a logic and you're logical explanation made me take a look at @tessellations in a completely different way than I used to. Everybody says that tessellations are patterns that spread on the paper but your pristine explanation makes it logical and even mathematical (geometrical I will say too).
You explained it so easy that I now understand every single tessellation model I folded better and I can't wait to fold one now in order to see how my mind reacts to the crease logic.
Amazing job, just amazing.
I guess it takes long long time to make a video about Llopio's moment of truth.
by tha way, those bricks looks fabulous.
Yeah, I've been pushing that one back, because it's going to be very hard to present that model well. :(

For perfect 7ths:
Fold the bottom right corner to the center and pinch along the diagonal. Then fold the corner to the pinch and make a second pinch on the diagonal. Fold from the bottom left corner through the intersection of the second pinch with the diagonal and pinch along the right edge. That pinch is exactly at 1/7.
Hope that made sense.
Do you speak when making the video or you record your voice later after editing? Because at certain parts I noticed a change in voice.
I speak while I record. On some parts of the video I later did a voice-over, and those are probably the differences you noticed. The background noise will never be the same, and I'm using a different microphone. So it does sound different.

Ok then is it too tiresome to do a video?How do you like it when people comment on it or when it is viewed by many people and its popularity increases?
Sorry, make a video what on? When did we start talking about tiresome? :)
As to your question on comments and views:
Yes, I do love it when people add comments (excluding irrelevant comments and such that have no content, such as "1st comment!"), and I do check how many views different videos get. It makes me happy when I get positive feedback, be it comments or views, or emails related to the video. I also appreciate comments that give adequate criticism (or in the ideal case: constructive criticism), because that helps me improve my future videos.
The view count and comments also tell me how good a job I did. If many people watch it, and many people comment on it, I must have hit the mark. If people are sharing the video (and thus making it more popular), then they must have enjoyed watching it, and probably were successful in folding their model. So I can conclude with a fair certainty that the model I chose to present is liked by many and, of course, that I presented it in an accessible way. :)

I'm hooked. Your videos have great quality. After trying projects 1 & 2 from Gjerde's book I especially appreciate your tips on making it all easy. Just folding sequences and photo's is sometimes very difficult in figuring out how to do it practically. Sometimes I had to do it over and over just to get it right and then the paper looks a bit crumpled. Masking tape is a great tip too: it saves you having to count over and over just to make sure you start folding at the right place. Please continue  your origami lessons. For me you are the best origami source on the web.
pleasseee make a video that shows how to fold a square in 7 ths pleeeassssseeee
There are three options I can think of right away:

1. Check http://www.fishgoth.... (last page) for instructions on how to fold 7ths.
2. Download ReferenceFinder to auto-generate instructions for how to fold 7ths: http://www.langoriga...
3. Fold 8ths and then cut off one strip on the top and the left.


Good evening your guide is Tessellation Bricks'm very interested, what is the size of the paper and how do I do division?
I am very good at Origami very complicated.
Thank you in advance
how many divisions did you use please answer
Happy new year Dear Sara
Thanking you for teaching us in such a "clean" and easy way, wish you and your loving people health and prosperity for 2012 and the years to come
Maria
I am impressed with the way by which the tessellations have been put together. The given example with Bricks has really helped me to understand it clearly. I am glad that you shared this video with us. Thanks.
Hi Sarah, where to find the diagrams of this model (as well as other diagrams from Ilan Garibi?)? Not sure if he has published a book....
Thanks
Hi ! I have discovered happy folding about a month ago, when I started focusing on @tessellations. Thanks so much for all the information available. This particular video is great!
Thanks for this video, it's very nuce and gives a good intro to @tessellations!
Two technical comments:
* When I search your site for "video type: tutorial & model type: tessellation and fractal" this video doesn't show. Only if I search only by model type I can find it.
* Could you maybe upload the crease patterns as a separate image?
Thanks again!
I think Garibi's molecule might be better described as a 5.5×5.5 molecule. Note that in the crease pattern you have there of 4 molecules on a 12×12 grid, the extreme right column and bottom row are superfluous, and without them you get a symmetric shape on an 11×11 grid.
More information about text formats

Tiled Hydrangea (Shuzo Fujimoto): Time lapse
Paper: 42.5cm by 30cm rectangle of Kozo paper, made by Ioana Stoian

Model: 26.5cm by 19.5cm
Today Ulf took care of Felix to leave me a couple of hours to do some origami. Ioana Stoian had given me two sheets of some wonderful Kozo paper, which she had manufactured in Japan - from chopping down the trees all the way to producing the final sheet of paper.

It was clear to me I had to fold something special from it. It also screamed tessellation, because I wanted to preserve the deckle edge. I thought about which model to fold from this paper for a while, and ended up with a tiled version of Shuzo Fujimoto's Hydrangea.

I also decided to color the paper with Faber-Castell Art Grip Aquarelle (colors 152, 143, 137, 139). I was a bit nervous about this, as I only had two sheets, and I didn't want to destroy the paper. Thankfully, it worked well, and I like the effect the colors have. (For inspiration I'd used this image.)
This video is sped up by factor 60 - so one minute of video corresponds to one hour of actual folding.
What music did you use for this video?
~Keith! Meyers!!
More information about text formats

Open-Back Triangle Twist: Instructions
I highly recommend the book "Origami @Tessellations" by Eric Gjerde if you are interested in @tessellations: http://www.happyfold...
This video demonstrates how to fold an open-back triangle twist. It is a technique that is often used in origami @tessellations.
The open-back triangle twist works on a triangle grid. The video also explains the difference between a twist that rotates clockwise or counterclockwise. If you fill the whole paper with open-back triangle twists, combined with hexagon twists, then you will receive the tessellation "Pinwheel" designed by Eric Gjerde. See a picture of one I folded here: http://www.happyfold...
can you teach us how to do the open back hexagon twist?
Yes, if all goes well I'll find enough time in the next two weeks to make that video. So keep your fingers crossed!

can you make normal origami now like modular and animals and so?
sara?  but i also appreciate your @tessellation videos too and anyway all of your videos are great
There'll be two more @tessellation technique videos to complete the four I wanted to publish this month. From next month on there'll be videos (one a month again if all goes according to plan) on non-tessellation models for a while.
I like to present a good mix of models. Now you may say four @tessellation technique videos in a row is too much, but the extension (although not quite completion) of my series on @tessellation techniques had had to wait for way too long. I kept pushing it back in favor of a different model. So I decided to make a bunch of videos and post them all in one month, so that it's still only one month of @tessellation techniques, but more than one video. Hope that makes sense. Essentially, you'll get three extra videos in one month, which surely isn't a bad thing. :) And next month there'll still be a new model, which is not about @tessellations.

More information about text formats

Origami @Tessellations: Awe-Inspiring Geometric Designs
hi sara can you please make some instructional videos of some coll, but not to difficult origami tesselations? like that star puff thing i really enjoyed it!
Where does one buy the glassine paper for these projects.  Additionally, when I see your videos of other projects, you use different paper than what I am able to get.  Could you please include the type of paper you use as well as where to purchase it?  For example, for the kalidascope video, I didn't know where to get paper that size.
I'd like to try what appears to be that type of shiney origami paper, but have no idea where it is sold.
Sue Carriveau
It is a hard question to answer, because I buy most of my paper offline, and the world is a large place.
When I stroll through cities, I usually just go into any shops that seem to be selling paper. Like this I have found some nice papers. I also have some places I visit "regularly", because their stock is great.
I've found that you can find glassine/pergamyn in most crafts stores, as well as in paper stores.
The paper I used in the video for the kaleidoscopic twister is called Kraft paper. It's cheap wrapping paper, but quite good to fold with. You may be able to find it at IKEA, at least that's what someone from the US told me last week. It's sold in many different stores in Germany.
In most other videos I use kami, probably the standard "origami paper". You can buy it in many online shops, although not all will sell it in sizes larger than 15cm / 6in. For more specialist paper, I really like origami-shop.com. They ship worldwide, so that does make the world smaller. ;)
The best advice I can give is to start exploring yourself. If you like origami, you'll probably also enjoy searching for paper. I sure do. :)

Sara,
If I remember correctly, you showed this book in one of your instructional videos, so I'm only assuming that you own it.
I was wondering if the book includes step-by-step instructions on how to fold all sorts of different tessellations, or are they just crease patterns?
The book includes step by step instructions but there are no normal origami diagrams there are pictures and than there is written sommething like fold  triangel twists (photo 3)

1-Cube Exercise (Alessandro Beber): Instructions
Paper used in this video: hexagon with a side length of 10.5 cm (4 1/8 in) and a diameter of 21 cm (8 1/4 in), kami
Finished model: hexagon with a side length of 5.25 cm (2 1/16 in) and a diameter of 10.5 cm (4 1/8 in)
This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami tessellation called "1-Cube Exercise" designed by Alessandro Beber.
Alessandro kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
More information about text formats

Folding 1-Cube Exercise (Alessandro Beber): real-time (1.5 hours)
Paper used in this video: hexagon with a side length of 10.5 cm / diameter of 21 cm, Elephant Hide
Finished model: hexagon with a side length of 5.5 cm / diameter of 11 cm
Do you enjoy watching and listening to someone folding paper? Then this video is for you! There's no talking, only the paper being creased speaks. :)
Here, I fold a hexagonal sheet of Elephant Hide into the tessellation "1-Cube Exercise" designed by Alessandro Beber.
More information about text formats

Star Puff (Ralf Konrad): Instructions
Here's another model that you can use as a nice winter / Christmas decoration. I prefer folding this model from opaque paper. Using foil paper gives it an extra sparkle!
Nice Video, Sara! But your voice sounds like you're very sleepy.. :D
Thanks sara!!!!!
How many divisions does the other two starpuffs that you show have ?
I think I started with a 32 division grid for the other two models I showed.

what is the blue paper
It's Pacon paper, which someone sent me. I can't tell you much more than than, because it doesn't have details on the package. It's quite nice to fold with, though.

this paper is the same paper i use! my one size fits all paper is very nice for just about everything not to mention cheap aswell. ive been able to find this paper in just about any teacher/ art supply store. sold in bunches of 200 sheets with dimensions of 9x9 inches or sold in roles online(i dont usually buy online and never have, i prefer to see the paper up close and personal before i buy).
Sold at the pacon website its called rainbow colored kraft. its paper properties are very nice with a rough fuzzy side for animals and a soft smooth side for insects and very crisp, strong paper.
http://www.pacon.com...
Simple and beautiful :) I loved making the Star Puff! I followed the 3 stars and then tried making them on a 32 triangle grid :) I wonder if there's a technique in doing triangle twists that guarantee a perfect triangle.. Sometimes I really have to force that twist so that the triangle comes out right.. I also love the fact that I can flatten the whole model again and try to make a different pattern of star puffs.. Thank you for making and sharing another tessellation with us ^_^ I'm still saving up for a copy of Eric Gjerde's book :)
Hi! DoctoBeans! Havent talked to you for a long time.. I love making this model also... Made it twice already and will be making more... =D... By the way, sara!, WONDERFUL VIDEO!
*clap clap* Wow, you know Sara, you have really outdone yourself this time, you-you know what, never mind, you do such a incredibly terrific job on all your videos already, I think it's impossible for you to get any better. (But with your brilliance I'm sure you'll come up with something)... Just, just don't stop privileging the world with your amazing videos.
                               Oh, by the way, thank you very much for the help on the double star flexicube.
-Phillip-- oh darn, I probably shouldn't have given away my real name on the web-oh well, it's probably nothing
thanks for the video but i just cant fold it i get stuck on the third star
If you were to make a larger model, you could create a star puff tower.  Also, there are so many variations of this model.
http://www.flickr.co...http://www.flickr.co...
So what will be your next video . will it be a tessellation or will it be jack in the box.
Please do reply to this comment
I plan to make Robin Glynn's Star Box next, then the Jack in a Box by Hugo Pereira. Also see: http://www.happyfold...


what is after the jack?
Could you show how to do the second variation, the one where the stars are up next to eachother to form a hexagon. I can't figure it out. Thanks.
Start with a grid with 32 divisions. Then place the first triangle twist as in the video (make a mountain starting in one of the points, going to the center, skip one point, next point minus two grid triangles add the next mountain fold). Make the twist counter-clockwise, fill the rest of the grid with triangle twists. Make a star puff in the center of the model and then two circles around.

cool
can you tell me how to make 1st variation
What do you mean by 1st variation?

How do you make the "Third" variation, the one with the puff in the middle, surrounded by triangle twists, and the other puffs on the corners?
For all variations, simply place the triangle twists where you want triangel twists or star puffs to go.
The variation you mentioned I folded on a 32-division grid. I then placed triangle twists in the center of the hexagon. You'll need 6 for the central star puff, then add a ring of triangle twists you'll leave like that. This requires another 18 triangel twists.
Then let one grid length space, and start 6 more such ring of triangle twists such that these rings will cover the corners. While you'll see that there's not enough space for another full circle (star puff surrounded by 18 triangle twists), it'll be just enough to place some star puffs right on the corners.

Thank you! Happy folding!
what do u mean by a 32 grid division?
By that I mean how many sections the paper is divided into. E.g. if you take a hexagon and then count the number of horizontal folds between two opposite raw edges, then you get the number of divisions. If you start with a square, count the number of sections created by the horizontal creases between two opposite edges (the other creases are not parallel to any of the raw edges).
If you have no idea what I'm talking about, please check http://www.happyfold... :) I talk about how many divisions you create here and there.


what direction is the first triangle twist
You can choose either direction. Only after the first triangle twist are the directions of all other triangle twists decided.

will you be doing more videos on tessalations?
Yes, actually I have vague plans to demonstrate Bricks by Ilan Garibi: http://www.happyfold...
I also need to finish my @tessellation basics series, and I believe I'll make a video on how to fold more than 3 stages of clover folding. I've been getting many queries of that ever since I made the 3-stage video.
I'm sure I'll also work on other @tessellation videos in the future, but this should give you an idea of what I've got planned already.


Could you also do an instructional video on the High Density Hydrangea Tiles?
i finally made this... love this model
thanks Sara for teaching me origami... :D
But please make some new videos.... ^^
Is the paper you are using actually creating the marks as you fold, or are you somehow drawing the lines in and then resuming the video? If the act of creasing is creating the black and burgundy lines, please tell me what kind of paper you are using.
Thanks!
Sara, I think that you did an excellent job. This is a great website, and it is enjoyable for numerous audiences. I have a question that I want to ask you: are there any good origami diagrams online and where can I find them?
Which kind of paper is this yellow paper?
Must be much more difficult to fold the model without making the lines with a pen for where to make the stars ;-(
Here we have only 3 stars, how to make more stars? Do you need to divide more the paper at the beginning?
Thansk for the replies
More information about text formats

Rhombus Twist: Instructions
I highly recommend the book "Origami @Tessellations" by Eric Gjerde if you are interested in @tessellations: http://www.happyfold...
This video demonstrates how to fold a rhombus twist. It is a technique that is often used in origami @tessellations.
The rhombus twist works on a triangle grid. The video also explains the difference between a twist that rotates clockwise or counterclockwise. If you fill the whole paper with rhombus twists, then you will receive the tessellation "Rhombus Weave" designed by Eric Gjerde. See a picture of a "Rhombus Weave" I folded here: http://www.happyfold...
Thank you for all your @tessellation videos. I was able to try several based on your instructions and I have now finally bought Eric Gjerde's book and am doing more :)
My tessellations are here:
http://www.flickr.co...
Thank you for teaching me so much :)
More information about text formats

Rabbit-Ear Triangle Sink: Instructions
I highly recommend the book "Origami @Tessellations" by Eric Gjerde if you are interested in @tessellations: http://www.happyfold...
This video demonstrates how to fold a rabbit-ear triangle sink. It is a technique that is often used in origami @tessellations.
The video also shows how to fold three rabbit-ear triangle sinks on a triangle grid. If you fill the whole paper with rabbit-ear triangle sinks, then you will receive the tessellation "Stacked Triangles" designed by Eric Gjerde. See a picture of one I folded here: http://www.happyfold...
More information about text formats

Open-Back Hexagon Twist: Instructions
I highly recommend the book "Origami @Tessellations" by Eric Gjerde if you are interested in @tessellations: http://www.happyfold...
This video demonstrates how to fold an open-back hexagon twist. It is a technique that is often used in origami @tessellations.
The open-back hexagon twist works on a triangle grid. The video also explains the difference between a twist that rotates clockwise or counterclockwise. If you fill the whole paper with open-back hexagon twists, combined with triangle twists, then you will receive the tessellation "Open-Back Hexagon Twist" designed by Eric Gjerde or "Basket Weave" designed by Joel Cooper. See a picture of an "Open-Back Hexagon Twist" I folded here: http://www.happyfold...
More information about text formats

Time-Lapse: Adulthood (Ilan Garibi and Hagay Golan)
Tutorial: next week!

Paper used in this video: square with a side length of 23 cm (9 in), kami
Model: square with a side length of 13 cm (5 in), height of 7 mm (0.3 in)

This video shows how I fold the origami tessellation "Adulthood" designed by Ilan Garibi and Hagay Golan.
Ilan kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.

Diagrams are published in the book "Origami @Tessellations for Everyone" by Ilan Garibi 

Actual folding time: 1 hour (including explanations)
Music: "About That Oldie" by Vibe Tracks
More information about text formats

Adulthood (Ilan Garibi and Hagay Golan): Instructions
Paper used in this video: square with a side length of 23 cm (9 in), kami
Model: square with a side length of 13 cm (5 in), height of 7 mm (0.3 in)

This video shows how to fold the origami tessellation "Adulthood" designed by Ilan Garibi and Hagay Golan.
Ilan kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
More information about text formats

Multi-Layer Clover Folding (Shuzo Fujimoto): Instructions
Paper used in this video: 24cm x 24 cm (9.5in x 9.5in), Kami
Sara Adams you blow of my mind.. always. youre awesome.I less than three you! (<3) Get it reply please thanks. =D
I like the "practice piece" you showed in the beginning of the video, with the different kind of finishing.  It looks more like a pyramid than a clover.  How did you do it?  Thanks!
Use a 6n-4 grid instead and skip the final step, which forms the zigzag edge.

Excellent.  I think I will try it for a 6-stage, giving me an easy number of divisions to work with.  :)  I will also try this variation collapse method too, thanks!
I just thought of something else to ask.  Is it possible to do "high-density" or tiled clover folding, like you can with the hydrangea model?  I know you can have an off-center point, but could you do multiple starting points?  Just an idea...
NICE TESSELLATIONS!! I was wondering what size of paper did you use for the 11 stage clover folding.
It was 19.5cm or about 7.5in. You can find this by looking at the description at the bottom of the 11- stage clover folding picture.
Can I use glass paper to fold tessellations?
Yes, I've folded tessellations with glassine / pergamyn several times. It's a bit harder to work with, but can deliver very nice effects. For example see:
http://www.happyfold...http://www.happyfold...http://www.happyfold...http://www.happyfold...http://www.happyfold...


Hi Sara, I was wondering which variation you used on your 7 and 11 stage clover folding and also which variation Shuzo Fujimoto does. Please reply:)
PS: I made a 7 stage clover fold, it was awesome! But it took about 2 hours!
I folded the closed version in the 7-stage fold, and the open version in the 11-stage fold. I think I also noted that in the video where I added the snapshot.

I was just curious why you said to crease every 2 diagonals, because i did a 7-stage a few weeks ago with only every 6 diagonals. I assume it's for making the collapses between the squares easier.
The advantage here is that when collapsing you won't need to add new creases anymore. This helps get better precision.

Hello Sara! I've got a question: what paper do you recommend using for my first try? Glassine , plain kami , shiny kami or Tant?( or maybe printer paper?) Also, Happy Easter!
Actually, I use kami for almost all my first folds. Of the paper types you listed, I'd say use kami or Tant - but definitely not glassine. It's harder to work with.
By the way, from my experience shiny kami usually isn't of great quality, and not the best paper to work with.

Thanks for the reply. I really look forward to the instructional video on the Begonia leaf, in looks great! Happy folding!
--Alex
Hello, i just recently learned how to fold the three stage clover folding model. I was wondering when you pre-crease for the five stage clover folding model do you do all valley folds or  do they vary please reply.
It's best to make all creases bidirectional, i.e. fold them valley and mountain. But if that's too much work, just go with either direction. You'll be reversing the creases and folding them as both valley and mountain while collapsing.

When i folded 64ths on both sides, the paper literally expanded 4 mm to one side so it became a rectangle. Have you ever heard of this phenomenon? I might have to change the papertype
It's totally normal to see this with machine-made paper. The reason is that in the production process, the paper fibers are basically aligned. So a horizontal crease will either run with the paper fibers or perpendicular to it. This means the paper will not be square anymore if you fold larger grids anymore.
You shouldn't see this effect (as much) with hand-made paper, as the fibers are then not aligned. However, I see no problem with having slightly off-square paper for tessellations - at least once the grid is folded.

Well, you see, the horizontal grid was finished, but when I folded the diagonal ones the edge was not aligned with the correct crease, so the paper was off by one 64th. I folded precisely all the way. I even tried to flatten the paper, but it didn't work, so I ended up with abstract creases.
To get precise diagonal folds, ensure that the creases run through the grid points of the small squares that you are folding the diagonal of. This is very different to aligning the corner of the paper with reference points. This is indeed the case, because the paper is not square anymore after folding the square grid.
And, yes, it's more work - but it will also result in much nicer precision.

So what happened was that the entire flap was parallel to the 64ths. That looked fine , but the diagonal point itself was not where it was supposed to be. According to the other creases everything was accurate, besides when I tried to fold the corners.
Not sure whether I understand you correctly. But I don't ensure that the grid is parallel, I only ensure that the crease actually runs through the corners of the small squares at the edge that's created when folding the blintz. Like that your diagonals are going to be precise in that they run through the corners of the grid squares.

That's is the problem though. When I try to line up the crease so it fits the small boxes at the end, the paper naturally lies in such a manner that when I've used the boxes as a reference point and the crease looks fine, the corner of the diagonal does not hit the intended intersection which makes me doubt the final outcome.
I think we are misunderstanding each other, and I'm not sure how to best solve it. :)
My point is to make the creases so that they run through the corners of the small squares - using no other reference. Then the crease - by definition - cannot have the error of not running through the corners of the small squares. To be clear, all other references you might use when the paper hasn't distorted due to folding a large grid do not matter and should not be used.

Yeah, miscommunication happens. but I understand. Since I used both the corners of the small squares and the corner as a reference, and they didn't match. I'll only use the boxes as a reference point then:)
Danke schön =)
Hello, I was just wandering what is the easiest way to fold sevenths?
You can try these instructions: http://www.fishgoth.... (last page) or use instructions as produced by ReferenceFinder: http://www.langoriga...


hi
can you please tell me how to get a 22x22 grid division .
reply
The easiest is probably to divide into thirds, then each third into eights. This gives you a 24 by 24 grid. Then you can cut off a strip on the top and right, which are each 2 squares thick.

Hello Sara!! I write from Argentina, I would like to know the dimensions of the paper to stage 6, and the measure to the 7 and on, etc etc, and you take the measure to the 5 stages is 24 x 24 and that gives 32 divisions but if the short is 28 divisions, thanks and very good videos!! continues to rise more tutorials and the truth that you're beautiful (-. -)!! Greetings from a distance and forgive for my English!!
Check http://www.happyfold... for a list of divisions needed for the different numbers of layers. As to paper size - it simply depends on how small you want to go.


Great post. The video was very interesting to watch. I loved the way you made that Multi-Layer Clover Folding. The method looks a little bit difficult but I think it is worth trying. I appreciate the effort and creativity behind this work. Thanks.
Hi, Mrs. Adams!
I LOVE it when you make @tessellation videos! I realize that you are probably very busy, but for your next video would it be possible to make a video for the 3464 Waterbomb Flagstone Tessellation By Eric Gjerde? It would be very nice to have access to one of the very rare tesselation videos!
~Keith
Very clear explanation, and really good method to obtain the model, I did enjoy to fold with this video. Thanks a lot Sara.
i really wish I could subscribe to you more than once im a really big fan
Thanks!

I remember starting origami and watching videos on this channel when I was about 6 years old. I made the 3-stage version from the old video, and several years later this one was uploaded, and I watched it, wanting to do more layers of the pattern. Unfortunately, figuring out the 28x28 grid was a bit too complex for me at the time, so I stuck with my 3-stage version. I gave up origami for a long time, as I started high school and soon after college.
I just had my 19th birthday, and decided why not pick up an old pastime. Here in America, the coronavirus is rampant, so I have tons of free time on my hands. So I picked up a piece of 8.5x11" sheet of printer paper, folded the diagonal, trimmed off the excess, and googled "fold a paper into 7ths" and went on. About 5 hours later, I finished it, and feel very proud but also nostalgic. Thank you Sara, for making these videos, and for showing me that the artist never leaves you, even when you grow up. <3
More information about text formats

Clover Folding (Shuzo Fujimoto): Instructions
Paper size: 20cm x 20 cm (8in x 8in)
Finished model: approx. 10cm x 10cm (4in x 4in)
Just watching the video, this model doesn't seem too hard.
(Famous last words)
it is almost  impossible and i have been folding for more than 3 years
I'm only ten and I've folded the hydrangea and the two large ones in one of the pics on this video.
lol
Hi Sara,
Thanks for another great video. A thought crossed my mind while I was watching: the 2 stage version must be the same as Thoki Yenn's Crossed Box Pleat model: http://www.britishor...
If so, I wonder if this is a development of that model or were they discovered independently?
Weird...I dont really see this version much,but instead i see "spores" cloverfolding methods such as the picture in this link:
http://www.flickr.co...
I've always wanted to fold this model so was pleased to find your video instructions.  I got really stuck at around 20 minutes.  But eventually everything became clear and I managed to complete it.
My first attempt is a bit rough but I think I will improve with practice.  To anyone else attempting this fold:  persevere, the end result is worth it!
Thanks again, Sara, for the video.
Thanks for this great instructional video :) I've done several models through your guidance, Sara.  Thank you very much for sharing them with us.  ^_^ I've actually taken some pictures of the origami that I did and linked back to your website a few times.  You make precreasing look so easy ^_^
Just wanted to tell you the video was excellent. Clear instruction, very nicely done.  I used this and your notes on your level 7 clover to get mine to level 5.  Just a small thing that I noticed(which you probably are aware of):  the diagonal formula of blintzing and then halving the folds that you demonstrate in your video for the level 3 does not work for higher level precreasing(the diagonals cut across the small squares in odd and varied but wholly incorrect places.)  You mentioned in your notes for your level 7 tessellation that you thought you diagonally precreased twice as much as you needed to. I think that you do have to preacrease that much.  After a fair amount of my own experimentation I found that there was no simpler way as with the level 3 ( you probably noticed that in the level 3 each small square has only one diagonal cutting through it.)  it seems that with higher levels, the diagonal precreases that allow for the collapsing (the roofs of the houses, as you call them) end up in the right place in one place, and the wrong place in others. It seems that you have to just hedge your bets and diagonally precrease in both directions through each small square ( forming an x.) Ugly, I know. But I think it's necessary. Anyway, it was just something I noticed in my own numerous experimentations.
P.S. Excellent website and beautiful accent! Makes listening to your videos that much nicer.
Thanks!
And PPS, I really hope I didn't come off as a long-winded jerk!
Isaac
Hey, thanks for your comment, I always appreciate detailed feedback.
Ravi Apte suggested you always fold a 2^n grid, add the diagonals, then extend to a 2^(n+1) grid. Then cut off the excess squares. I haven't tried yet, but maybe that ensures that the diagonal folds are exactly in the right places. Of course, you can then figure out where to make the diagonals with this formula, rather than cut excess paper.

Could you pleas make a video of a 5-stage Clover Folding or more.
i am not that good and dont get it.
thaks.
Hey have you gone nuts
Dont you know that making a video takes long time
I guess u are out of your brain
just thought about that.
very sorry for bothering you Sara Adams.
love your videos
I might make a small video response explaining how the 4th stage is done. After that it should be easier to generalize to more stages. Not sure when I'll find time, though.

Wow thanks a lot,
you rule.
thank ypu I can finish my origami collection
Eeek!! My central square (first square) became a rounded square!! :o
Mine looked horrible with all the squares crooked and rounded. The first step of precreasing was really hard! I was really lucky to have survived all the collapsing. :D Phew!
I had trouble on my first one too. However, it turned out pretty well. I've been folding for over a year though. (If you have, too, no offense. I'm just saying.)
Hey... I did it... It came very nice. Love your videos. thanks a lot Sara!!!
wellthe three stage is fne cuss i can pobalby do i in my sleep super simple even toug i am 13  but then i experimented with the seven stage but thats hard so i was wondering if you could do  something bigger or do a vedio  of a 7 stage  clover folding please i beg u thanks for u hearng me out and thanks.!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
I was very surprised as to how easy this was. I got stuck at the second collapse, but after you likened it to the first level, I completed the rest comparatively quickly. I look forward to making more stages soon. I love your videos. You also helped me make the Hydrangea model as well.
hi sara i have don the square grid divisions on the 7 staged clover folding but i dont know what the creasing is for the diagonals
Just crease all the diagonals, and you'll be fine.

One method I use is, if I need a particular diagonal, I just mark two points alng the line with a encil, then I either unfold the whole model to make room then re-collapse it or just get in in along the other folds.
thanks i finally done the 7 stage clover folding i might put it on youtube
once i do ill show u a link to it
Today I finally completed 4 stage clover folding. Turns out (at the risk of copyright infringement) you need the 6/22 and 20/22 Mountain diagonals (the crease meets the edges x squares from the corners) and 12/22 and 18/22 Valley diagonals. Also, the pinching the edges is the same, just 8-square-long Mountains instead of 5.  Hope I helped someone here.
How do you make the multiple levels like the green one? I only understand how to make the 4 squares with the one square on top.
Please check happyfolding.com/gallery-fujimoto-7_stage_clover_folding for advice on how to do extra levels. The folding process for more levels is similar to the sequence shown in the video for the 3rd level.


Thanks so much for your awesome tutorials.  I have learned so much from you.  The clover folding took several tries, but at last I succeeded, however, my attempt at folding more levels is still a work in progress.
I'm sure you'll also figure out how to do more levels. happyfolding.com/gallery-fujimoto-7_stage_clover_folding provides some additional information. And feel free to ask for help if you really get stuck.


I am tiring to fold a 5-stage clover folding and I am at the part where I have finished the second stage and I have to do the water bomb bases on all 8 sections at the back. If I try to do one of the water bomb bases, it overlaps with the one beside it. What do I do? Please help
Hm, maybe a video on further stages should be the one for this month...
I'll see what I can do tomorrow (took a day off), else I'll try to explain in words.

Thank you so much. You took a day off just to help. Thank you!!!!!!!
Ah, not quite. I took a day off, and thought I might also do a video on that day. :)
Anyway, I just finished recording. I'll have to see whether the recording turned out well, but I'm guessing it will be good enough to make it as a video. Not sure whether I'll finish it today and upload it, but I'll try my best.

is the step your doing at 19:44 the step i should be repeating to make a 5 level clover folding?
I folded some Fujimoto clover models some time ago. They are on my weblog. I cannot explain how I made the multilayered ones. When I discovered how to do it, it was simple.http://annemieke-ori...
Nice folds. :)
hey sara im 11 and i love your videos ive made the normal clover folding and i wanna make the 5 stages i dont know how to fold it  i dont know how double the creases please help im despreate
Since I've gotten many questions on how to make more than 3 stages, I'll probably make a video showing how to do that. I thought it was an easy enough exercise to fold more stages if you knew how to fold 3 stages, but I guess I was mistaken. :)

Here is the link for the video with more stages.
http://www.happyfold...
First, thank you very much for your site and your videos. I am folding only since a month, and your site is a mine of useful informations for beginners like me. You do have didactic skills that make the video a great help.
Now, i have questions about the precreasing for the clover:
- first, is it a standard precreasing technique, or do you use it for this precise project because the mountain and valley folds one obtains suit the necessary ones for the clover model?
- second, is it the kind of precreasing technique you use for your bigger models? the accuracy of your folds in the already finished complex models you present is admirable, and i wanted to know if you can obtain such an accuracy when you fold multiple layers of paper, as you do in this video for the diagonals (e.g. for the 1/8) or the medians, where you fold over with no unfolding - i was wondering if having two or four layers of paper could induce less accuracy because of the height of the fold itself, at least for the outside crease. I am just asking here, i am not so far that i could tell from my own folds if it works out well or not.
Thank you again for your site, and for taking the time to put such thoroughly designed informations on the internet.
I basically never fold multiple layers at the same time when precreasing grids if I am working on a display model. I may do so if it's just a trial piece to understand a concept, rather than get a stunning model. I fear as soon as you fold multiple layers precision won't be as nice anymore. There are two reasons. First, the paper has a thickness, and so when you have several layers the creases will be positioned slightly differently on each layer. Second, the paper may also drift slightly, thus increasing the error further.
As to the direction of creases - I usually don't really care about them when precreasing for tessellations. I know some people make them bidirectional for an especially nice finish, but I rarely do that. My grids are usually in the end accordeon folds (i.e. valley mountain valley etc) because I like to align edge with edge for good precision.

Thanks a lot for your detailed answer - it is a big help for me in order to understand more about all these (for me) new methods.
I am always looking for neat projects to do at work, i have a lot of down time, especially on Sunday! I really enjoyed making this model. it is flat and so slides nicely into the cubical :) i hope to learn to make the larger stages but i'm afraid to try since my paper is limited to 8.5 in per side. Any thoughts on where to get better materials?
---*--- regards, Krystle ---*---
Krystle,
I am assuming you are using regular copy paper since you stated 8.5 as your paper size. I wouldnt reccomend kami(aka origami paper) for this model, as it is very thin and deteriorates with larger grids. it is okay for the 3 stage, but make sure you buy a bigger size tahn the usual 5 or 6 inch. ive found 8 to work quite well. My suggestion would be to go to either kimscrane.com and browse, or to origami-shop.com, both of which have a large selectipon of paper. Glassine, sometimes refferd to as kite paper, is lovely fo this model. Its thin but strong, and it lets you see many of the layers with a backlight. Personally, i have liked doing this in vellum and in gold foil for the effects. Hope this helps!!
a fellow paperfolder and happyfolding follower,
Elyk626
-Kyle-
I had tried to fold the Hydrangeas before, and I failed horribly :)
But this was easier. The first time I had a LOT of trouble for the second stage collapse and started yelling at the video but then I realized I could manipulate the paper to go into the right direction. My finished model looks great, if made from nicer paper one could frame these! Beautiful! Thank you Sara for making this video, you explain things wonderfully and your accent makes it even better.
Are Pacon paper squares suitable for this model if I want to go deeper than three levels?
I just love all your models
More information about text formats

Kami by Jong Ie Nara Review
Kami is simply the word for paper in Japanese,  but in the last fifteen years or so it has come to mean 'ordinary' origami paper,  the type that can be bought pre-cut in squares everywhere. Unsurprisingly it is the most popular paper for origami and needs little introduction. However there are many, many producers of the classic square, with color on one side and white on the other. For example, the OUSA carries the Toyo brand, distributed in the USA by Mountain Valley Paper company, and available on The Source.
But since we cannot review them all we chose to review  the paper by Jong Ie Nara (JIN), a South Korean company.
Jong Ie Nara, which means 'Paper World',  was founded by Dohun Jung In 1972. Looking through their website you can see that they truly follow their motto: "Let's make a beautiful world together with Jong Ie Nara". Their products can be found in over 68 countries and in December 1998 they established the Jong Ie Nara Museum for paper art.
Their catalogue is immense. I went to look in my 15 cm paper drawer (yes, I do have a drawer for every paper size) for some to fold, and I found Pearl paper, Hologram paper, Duo papers, Melody and many more by JIN, but in this review we are going to focus on the basic product - simple, color on one side origami paper.  For the complex models and tessellations I found an old packet of 30cm paper which is not in the catalogue any more, but still can be bought in BOS supplies. For all the others, 15 cm was sufficient.
Four years back, I had the notion that the best paper for my early attempts with @tessellations is Kami; it must be called Origami paper for a reason! I was surprised to see it didn't really work. Today, with more than hundred paper types in my collection, I am older and wiser, and will try to see what it is really good for.
Texture: All papers are smooth to the touch. Some colors have a plastic feel and look to them, such as the grey and light brown. The red paper will turn your finger red. The color is spread quite even, with drops of amoebas shaped water marks spread over, which are hardly visible. The paper has a little shine to it.
Simple models don't ask for much, and this paper is just what is needed. With a model comprising few layers and a simple folding procedure, Kami is just right. There is, however, one issue with this Kami. Usually, during the folding of the crane, the model lies flat, but not this time. Annoyingly, the sides of the head tend to curve . Maybe it's because of the semi-plastic coating?
The JIN Kami is stiffer than usual. All in all, action models work very well.
The black nosed dog barks again and again, showing the flexibility of the paper.
The red bird flapped perfectly - usually one wing tends to be higher than the other, but here it was perfectly symmetric.
The yellow frog jumps nicely, but not as high. But it makes many somersaults.
I chose red. In my experience, red Kami is usually thicker than the rest of the pack, but not this one. While folding the grid, you can feel how soft the paper is. Using a bone folder, the color vanished from the crease line, leaving a white line and red fingers. The creases are easily visible on both sides. Precreases are easy to fold, although the lack of surface tension makes it harder to make a diagonal crease on the grid. During the collapse you get the feeling this paper is gentle and fragile, but still the paper 'breaks' in the right places and thanks to its thinness the layers fall exactly above each other. The final result is clean and sharp, more accurate than most papers I used, and if not for the white points in every corner (where the red just scraped off), it looked very good. With back light the crease lines become transparent, giving the model an interesting look.
I chose the pink paper. Grid went well, and since this model has no pre creases, I went on to the collapse phase. At this stage you need some resistance from the paper, but this one is too soft. I had to use the sharp edge of my bone folder to flatten misplaced layers, and I tore it in one place. Shaping the tip of the pyramids, once again I realized how weak this paper is. The final result is not bad, and unusual  (a pink tessellation, imagine that...) With backlight, as always, it's better.
I chose the grey paper. The color gives the paper some elastic behavior. The paper is smaller than I normally use to fold this model, but it's also thin, so there is no real problem here. I used a bone folder to strengthen the creases and the result is fine. I had very little problem with the open and close sink (step 37). I even managed to have sharp ends with the legs, but maneuvering many layers (folding the breast at step 85) is difficult. I needed to apply force with my fingernails to ensure that all the layers went into place and stayed there. The final result is good, the flying horse stands steady, and the wings are stable.
Box-pleating until the base was made was surprisingly easy. The elastic coating gives the paper the surface tension it needs, so it just snaps into place. Shaping the legs and talons requires more determination than usual, with many sinks. Reversing a fold is done easily with this paper, so forming the wing tips and feathers went well.
I chose 3 colors, dark blue, light blue and green. Modulars should be the bread and butter for this paper, and it is. It's easy to fold, even with the issue of not going flat (see crane)   It just works well! Reversing is easy, and for the puffing the paper is stiff enough at that size to hold the rounded shape very nicely. Still, some of the units gave me a fight. For assembly, the stiffness is very helpful. The final result is stable and easily holds its own weight.
This model was very easy to fold. The paper is thin, yet strong and stiff enough to do reverse folds. During the folding sequence the paper behaved like high end papers, but when finishing off you can see how simple it is. The legs are too weak to hold the complete model.
This lovely simple model was folded in a flash, and from a smaller than usual square. Nevertheless, it was shaped very easily, resulting with very nice  3D effect. The paper may be a bit stiffer being hand painted, yet still I was surprised and enjoyed the final result.
With so many layers, this was difficult to fold, but this paper is thin enough to cope with this task. The paper is not flexible, and if you miss a corner while making a crease, it's hard to fix it, if at all. Here, too, the legs are not strong enough to hold the donkey.
After the rat and the Donkey, I realized this paper is good for low-complex models, with many reverse folds. I chose this peacock and wasn't disappointed! The folding just went well and I was happy with the results.
This summary must start with a sigh. Yes, it is the most popular paper for origami. For simple models, simple action models and modulars it is almost perfect. Yes, it's all true, but it does have a major flaw - it looks too simple.
Tessellations went better than I thought, and I am surprised to say, it is a good paper for such. 3D models went well, and it's even good enough for high intermediate and low end complex models.
And here comes the big 'But': It doesn't look good. The white side is all too visible, it can even be seen through cracks in the colored side. The strong, unnatural colors, the smooth and dull texture - does one really want to put so much effort in a complex model that doesn't look that good?
Still, there are modulars, and for those this is a very suitable paper. Here, using the small sizes and packs of 1000 sheets, you can fold and fold and fold, and be happy with what you get.
A word about this particular brand, since this is not a comparative test of many Kami manufacturers. We chose this brand for being accessible, with good cost benefit ratio, and we think it's got a good spot in the center - you can find some high end Japanese papers which are better, and sadly to say, too many with much lower quality.
In Flickr 2,165 results show the popularity of this paper. Many (I couldn't count...) are modulars, and simple animals. Here and there I found a tessellation, but rarely a complex model.
Bottom line: simple, too simple.
They are good with Modulars and the large variety of colors Is useful.

60° Pleat Intersection: Instructions
Hi Sara,
Thanks for all your tutorials on @Tessellations. They have proved invaluable. I bought the above book believing that it would give me step by step instructions on how to fold tessellations. I have personally found this book almost impossible to follow as much of it makes no sense and is unclear. It may be that I am new to this but I am not stupid and have made the pieces you have shown so I am capable. The designs in the book are great but achieving them seems to be illusive. His basic instructions are mostly a mystery.
Is there another book you can reccomend that is better written? I fear spending more money on a book and finding another poorly written instructional book.
I look forward your next tutorial. They are great. I look forward to hearing from you.
All the best for the festive season.
Ms S.Whyles
More information about text formats

Triangle Twist: Instructions
can you ask eric to allow you to make a video of the open back triangle twist?i have problems with the six project(pinwheel) in eric book.
oh and i was the one who commented on the five and four.i just bought the book and found out how to make it.
so please reply ASAP
I've been meaning to do more of the technique videos, but time has been short, and some other things took priority. In any case, I do have plans to make a video on the open back triangle twist and a couple more techniques.
Also, I need no permission from Eric Gjerde to make these technique videos. I'm sure he'd say yes if I had to, but in general techniques are just techniques and do not "belong" to a specific designer.

More information about text formats

Hexagon Twist: Instructions
I've always had trouble with the tesselation twists, but your video was very helpful!
Cheers,
Derek
Your instructions are excellent. Do you have a video instruction for the square twist?
Cheers,
Wade
I've been meaning to post more technique videos for a while now, let's see when I get round to doing it.

Thanks for Making such difficult folds in to simpler steps.
I hope now sooner i would be able to finish my own one.
:-)
Sara, thanks for you video, it was very helpful... but then i got stock in a part of the flower start. I don't know what to do, it would be great if you can help me, because I don't know how to close the flower!!!! I'm stock. Thanks.
I'm confused - which flower? Can you give a time reference?

:P sorry.
Sara, the model is the Flower with start by Roberto Gretter, the hexagonal variation of flower with a hearth, by Maria Grazia Zordan.
This is the link: http://web.archive.o...
Thanks
Can you please also tell me which step you are having problems with? I.e. don't tell me "start of flower", but please step x. Then I can try and have a look.

Or, even better: ask these kind of questions in an origami forum, eg. http://snkhan.co.uk/...

You'll most likely get an answer more quickly there. I'll be travelling, and am insanely busy right now (and in the coming months), so my responses are slow - especially if they involve looking at diagrams first.

Hope you understand,


More information about text formats

120° Pleat Intersection: Instructions
More information about text formats

120° Inverted Pleat Intersection: Instructions
Sara,
I love your videos.  I bought Eric's book and tried to follow the diagrams.  Now, at last with your videos, it all makes sense.  I like the way you proceed slowly and stay with the camera.
Congratulations.
More information about text formats

Origami @Tessellations
Great job on the video Sara! its really cool. I was wondering if you might  be able to make a video showing how to make the water bomb tessellation. its really cool
I uploaded the video last week. Enjoy!

thank you so much for all the videos you have downloaded
Will you be able to make instructional videos on most of the tesselations?
I would like to have an instructional video on the stacked triangles
(:  I like the exploded cheese :)
I will look into making more videos. Note that the stacked triangles is one of the harder projects, which does of course not mean I'll exclude it from my considerations for my next video.
The next model I'll show from this book is probably the "Star Puff" by Ralf Konrad. It's a simple project, but really beautiful.

I was just looking at the video again and was just wondering what type of paper did you use for the Hydrangea.... Did you use origami paper or double-tissue paper?
The red hydrangea was folded from double-tissue. Worked like a charm. The model was folded from a 17cm square, and I did 7 levels on it.  I think I might have been able to do another level, actually.

AWESOME! Never thought it would work... Thanks! I will try it! Yesterday, I finally finished all of your origami tesselation that you have taught! Thank you very much!
i like ur chose of colors
is there a bird base tesselation in that book cause i looked it up on books.google and saw there is bird base by the way the hydangea looks like a poinsetta
I can't remember a bird-base tessellation, but don't have access to the book right now (travelling over the holidays). If a preview of the book shows a bird-base tessellation, though, I guess there's one in there. ;)

at the convention some guy let me look through the book i found it
that was easy to make!!! kami works well and a paper that seems like thin cardstock.
UMM.. IN MY BOOK, I DONT HAVE THE MODEL "RHOMBIC FLOWERS", BUT THE MODEL RHOMBIC WEAVE...
I folded the rhombic flowers from a crease pattern available on Eric's website. See http://www.origamite...


Yes there is one called Bird Base (Christine Betten) but the only ones I've folded yet are the Five-and-Four (easy, even for a beginner), Spread Hexagons (hard to get the hang of, but then pretty easy), Star Puff, and Waterbomb.
Did I see a partial chateau-chinon in the middle of the book? If not, what was it?
i read you made the hydrangea from double tissue and i liked the way it looked so i tried
either i used the wrong type of tissue or you did something different to it...
now i know how to make it dont get me wrong...
Do you think that the transparent paper is good for origami because im thinking about buying some
Well, that depends on two things:
1. The model you want to fold
I do like folding with translucent paper for tessellations. I haven't used it much for any other projects, though.
2. The type of translucent paper
The thing you have to be most careful about with translucent paper is that it doesn't break after you've folded it back and forth just a couple of times. I guess it's a bit of a trial and error, so before you buy a large supply of paper (this holds for all kinds of paper), do buy a test sheet and give it a try first. Generally, if the translucent paper is quite stiff and thick, it'll probably be less suitable for origami.
could you make a crease pattern for 4 stages up to 11 stages?
I'm not sure I see the sense in that. The crease pattern is just like for 3 stages, really. But I do have vague plans to make a video showing how to fold more stages. I think that would help more.

it took me a month to get the hang of the instructions
Hey Sara I was wondering if you could try to get permission for more origami tessellations i have already made all the tessellations on your origami channel :D
More information about text formats

Karaperapisu (カラペラピス) Paper Review
There are some benefits for having a Japanese speaking editor. When Jason Ku stayed in Japan for a year, he opened a gateway for me to some incredible Japanese papers. This article, as well as the next five, are dedicated to those papers.
We start with a unique, iridescent paper. Its name, as far as we know, has no real meaning, and it may come from the word "Karape" (カラペ - Ka Ra Pe) which is a shortening of the English term "Color Wrapping Paper". Rapisu has no meaning, but it does roll nicely on your tongue.
It is made and distributed by Takeo, a Japanese producer (with more than 5000 papers in its catalogue!), and packed by Toyo, marked as an origami paper. By the way, on the Takeo site it is referred to as a gift wrapping paper.
It is not good for everything, as it sits in the middle of the low weight group. It is mainly for complex and multi-layered models, so do not look for modulars or simple folding in this article. We were unable to get any official data, so it is all based on our tests.
The extreme version is based on an 8×8 molecule (unlike the 6×6 in the original) and an extra stage in the collapse. This version asks for a thin, very thin paper, but with agility and resistance. Karaperapisu is such a thin paper, and yet the first folds reveal that the paper breaks and takes creases like a much ticker paper. I folded a 34 by 34 grid and could reverse it with only little effort. Only rarely do I miss the existing crease line. I work slowly, sometimes even very slowly, while doing the precreasing. The diagonal folds do not jump into corners, and you have to lead them slowly to place. The black side has very little bump and it is hard to see the crease lines. The collapse is done in three stages, and this is where this paper rocks! It is so thin, yet highly responsive, keeps its shape even when there are many layers, and the paper stay crisp even after a lot of handling.
I could fold the model with this paper very quickly - perhaps my fastest fold of it yet. The paper snaps into place accurately. It was easy to fold the grid as well as all the precreases accurately, and collapsing the base was easier than ever. The paper folds beautifully, and reverses with no effort at all. Truth be told, the talons are usually a big problem, but not this time. Throughout all the open sinks, the paper behaved perfectly. I used tweezers for the final details and the result is highly satisfying.
This is the first time I folded the lyrebird. There are many box-pleating moves here and for the first time the paper is a little disappointing. When I fold two to four layers together, I lose accuracy. Inner pleats are much harder to reverse, as required when open sinking back and forth. While pulling aside a layer to reverse it, the paper tore. Another tear formed when I opened the many layers of the wing
base. On the plus side, the series of outside-inside reverse folds to create the tail went really well. There is a total of 16 layers of paper, and only few paper types allow manipulating so many layers this easily. To complete the tail, you have to fold a corrugation. I had a lot of issues here. Using the method suggested in the book, it was almost impossible to pull out the wanted layer and to push it back, because of the little tensile strength this paper has. I then tried folding it like a tessellation, but the creases I formed by folding all layers at the same time didn't give me accurate enough crease lines to work with. It was a complete mess. Indeed, this model has steps that you can only easily complete with thin paper, and then other steps where you need some stiffness - which this paper lacks.
Precreasing went perfectly. The paper has great memory and it was easy to make the long fold lines the first steps. I managed to shape the model as I wanted, and the paper held the shape without MC or other help. Surprisingly, even though the stick has many layers, I managed to get it right, too.
The paper folds well; I liked the way it reverses and holds the creases and shape. Yes, it is a thin paper, but not thin enough for this model. The hands have so many layers - too many to shape them as I wanted to. Another issue was the weakness - when pulling the paper aside, it easily tears, so I had to work slowly while shaping the beard.
At the age of fourteen, Ynon Toledano is our special third opinion reviewer.
The paper folds great. It is easy to reverse fold lines, and with both models, the many layers were no obstacle for me. It is good for shaping as well, and I managed to create all small details of the legs. It did tend to break and tear at the edges, and I use just a little MC enforcement at the final stages. All in all it’s a perfect paper for insects, and I really enjoyed it.
While we had hugely varying opinions in our previous review, we had a complete wall to wall approval here - it is a great paper, especially for complex and 3D models. Even for tessellations it worked fine, thanks to the contrast very few papers can achieve: only 0.071mm thick, and yet it can hold a crease perfectly.
However, it is not a perfect paper. There is a price to pay here – the paper is weak and will tear if not handled carefully, as it happened to us. Moreover, its texture and the black reverse - although rare and unique - create a problem: you cannot color it and not that many models are suitable for the iridescent look.
In flickr, I found no pictures of models made from it. It is probably because it is not a well known paper. With more and more online stores starting to sell it, I believe this will change soon.
It is thin, unique in color, and has perfect memory. If you like to fold bugs or complex models, this is the paper for you.
Bottom line: a treasure to be found!
I folded a modular from this paper:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/115665376@N07/15174884343/
Even though it's thin, it works for modulars, if you choose a small paper size. Folding units from 15 cm or larger would most likly result in an fragile object, but  5 cm or 3.75 x 7.5 cm as in my examplar work well.
Perhaps that's just me, but I like small modulars and those ask for thin paper. This one is highly suitable for that, iridescent is a plus and DC too, both is nice for many modulars.

10k Subscribers and Wishes for 2011
Hello Sara and happy holidays to you too! One wish I would like to have would probably be a video on how to make another tessellation, I'm really interested in them.
That'll be an easy wish to fulfill. I already have one or two more @tessellation videos planned. :)

merry christmas, and happy hollidays!  a wish i have is that you would do a video on a model of jeremy schafers. maybe the swiss army knife or nail cutters?
Great! What tessellations do you plan on doing a video on?
But in this video http://www.happyfold... in one of her comments she mentioned she would be folding bricks by Ilan Garibi sometime soon.
I wish for Llopio's Moment of Truth  :)
Been waiting for that one for quitsome time now
I would relay appriciade if you make a tutorial on  Llopio's Moment of Truth.
I know that it takes long to make a video, but you don't have to make a diagram in the video.
just make the video, make the lines and cut the video.
done!!!
Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year
My Xmas wish is that you continue to make these incredible videos. I definately appreciate the work you put into the videos. I don't have any specific 2011 video wishes, I'll simply follow you on your video journey! Happy New Year !! (Tom)
Hi Sara  the model I'd like to see is the Jell O Ball by Charles Esseltine, I have asked before for a video on this model because i think it is a great model so if you manage to do a video on this model you'll make me soooooooooo happy!!!!!!!!!!!!!
im with u on this one.it looks like a cool model
Could you make a video on the secretary bird by Roman Diaz?
woooaaaooo I love your blog, you are incredible you are my fan number 1.
I do somethings with paper I am working with the Rose Kawasaki but when I see your videos really I fall in love with you jejejejeje.
Thanks for all the nice things that shows us
Merry Christmas from  Mexico my dear artist.
Where you come from ???
I'm from Germany.
estoy muy entusiasmado con tu pagina Sara. desde que la encontre es mi centro para poder disfrutar el Origami.
te deseo una feliz navidad y un lindo año nuevo.
y MUCHAS MUCHAS FELICIDADES Y GRACIAS POR TENER ESTA PAGINA!!!
saludos desde México
i am really excited with your page Sara. since i found it, i made of it my center of pleasure Origami.
i wish you a Merry christmas (too late) and a nice New Year.
and CONGRATULATIONS AND THANKS FOR THIS AWESOME PAGE!!!
greetins from México
(sorry about my english, i dont have good english)
jaja pienso que eres la mujer perfecta por que aparte de hacer Origami, eres MUY HERMOSA y, por lo que vi en un video donde respondes preguntas, trabajas en Google. YO QUIERO UNA COMO TU!!!!!
i think that you are the perfect woman, because you do Origami, you are a VERY BEAUTIFUL WOMAN, and for what i saw (and understood), you work in Google.
I WANT A WOMAN LIKE YOU!!!!!
Sorry, already happily taken. :)
Hey Sara!
Thank you so much for recommending Origami Essence for me instead of Origami Sequence. I am really enjoying the models! THANK YOU!
Stephen
More information about text formats

Golden River (ゴールデンリバー) aka Leather Paper Review
This is the third Japanese paper we reviewed. Just like the first two Japanese papers we reviewed (Karaperapisu and Biotope), Golden River (ｺﾞｰﾙﾃﾞﾝﾘﾊﾞｰ) is distributed by Takeo and packaged by Toyo. As before, we were not able to find official data on the paper. So we had to complete this review based on the laboratory tests and our own hands-on experience.
I met this paper in Italy, and it was called Leather; not because how it felt, but mostly because of the look. There is a unique texture that does remind you of animal hide. I met it again in Takeo store, in Tokyo, and later in Nicolas Terry Origami – shop.
While folding the grid, you can feel how sturdy the paper is. There's a major difference between folding with or against the grain: when breaking the fibers it feels much stiffer. Reversing the fold lines is done effortlessly in both directions, although it is much better when you go against the grain. The precreasing continues to be a joy on the diagonal folds, as they find their way to the corners without any problems. Both of the phases of the collapse go quickly and easily. The paper literally jumps into place. The final model looks interesting: the texture is visible and adds to the model's charm.
This is a box-pleating model and the paper is highly suitable for that. Creasing through two, four, or even more layers at once leaves good crease marks on all layers, which makes it easy to sink back and forth as required. The paper is very snappy, jumping into place.
In step 55 you need to fold 30 layers at once. It's doable, but not comfortably. From here on, I was disappointed by the paper's performance. The paper is much too thick to add all the details. I couldn't shape the legs, the head, and in particular the tail. It is a corrugation, smartly used as feathers, but with that many layers, I could not crease it as shown. I had to open the model and make all pre-creases one by one, while the paper was flat. The final model looks clumsy, not even close to as delicate as it should be.
Golden River is a great choice for simple folds. I made the six units without any problem. Puffing the petals showed this paper has a lot of tension and can be stretched without crumpling. The weakness on the veins of the leather texture are a minor weakness: if a crease runs just along it, it may be hard to place the crease correctly, rather than on the vein. Assembly is fun. The tabs are stiff, and the final model is highly stable.
I colored the paper with grey FolkArt acrylic paint. This changes the paper's behavior a little. To be more specific, it resists shaping a bit more. While this paper is not thin, it is not too thick to pose real problems, even with the ears. While shaping, it is easy to give the body volume and to achieve a rabbit that stands stably.
This is the first model I folded with Golden River. Truly, this first fold tells almost the complete story of this paper. The creases are sharp, strong and crisp. Accumulating layers shows a shortcoming: the layers won't lay flat. Step 36 asks for reversing the left side, and in sharp corners the paper  resists this manoeuvre. Quickly, this turns out to be the paper's main issue: it is too thick to allow easy shaping of the legs, or to sink some layers together. On the other hand, it is an advantage when you lock the sides of the sheep together: it holds strongly.
I first tried to fold a complex Centaur. I couldn't finish it, although I used a 35cm square. There was no way I could have shaped the fingers or the other small details. So I changed my models to more simple ones. With these intermediate models, I found the paper easy to fold and shape. You can fold many layers with it, as the paper is relatively thin, but you have to be careful not to tear it. For me, the paper tore once on a crease line. It seems the fold lines reduce the paper's durability.
At the age of fourteen, Ynon Toledano is our special third opinion reviewer. Ynon found the paper to be strong and durable. There was no need to add MC. Golden River is slightly too thick to be suitable for complex, but for this rose, without many overlapping layers, it was good. Folds are sharp, although a little difficult to reverse. Shaping the petals was easy and the result was satisfying.
With 80gsm, this paper is in-between: too thin for tessellations, too thick for complex. But its great texture, the unique look you can get with it and the way it can be shaped to will, it is a wonderful choice for 3D animals and modulars. Especially models without multiple layer or tiny fingers will benefit most from it.
In flickr, it is usually referred to as Leather, rather than Golden River. I found only 21 pictures, mostly of animals, plus some fractal stars.
Golden River's texture is its main selling point, but not its only one. Its midway thickness is a good compromise that allows both shaping and accumulating a few layers without a real problem.
Bottom line: beautiful texture!
What is the paper made of?
I  used half of a 15 cm sheet of leather paper to wet-fold Michael LaFosse's Happy Lucky Bat.  I had no problems working the dampened paper, and it shaped very well.

Celtic Circle Tessellation (CP)

Tessellation (Robert Lang)
More information about text formats

Biotope (ビオトープ) Paper Review
This is the second Japanese paper we reviewed. Just like the first one, Karaperapisu, Biotope (ビオトープ) is distributed by Takeo and packaged by Toyo. Again, we were not able to get official data, so this review will solely be based on our tests.
As you will see, this paper is a bit of a mystery. In some ways, it is very average – it’s not super strong, nor thin, nor specially textured. Yet we all absolutely loved it! It feels stronger than the scores suggest and folding multiple layers works better than you think would be possible at its thickness.
Without further ado, lets head on to the detailed review.
Right after folding the first grid lines I had this urge to smile - the paper folds beautifully! The creases are sharp and so easy to reverse. However, there is a major difference between folding with or against the grain. For the diagonal precreases some tension is needed to break the paper from corner to corner of every small grid square. It works very nicely with this paper. Creases are visible and easy to feel, so I could complete this phase quickly. Collapsing the model went well, too. In the first phase of collapsing, the paper fell into place with a snappy click. In the second, much more demanding phase of collapsing, I did get some crumples here and there. Still, the paper really jumped into place and I was able to easily complete a very accurately folded model!
The paper is strong, and you can feel it immediately. Although a single layer may become too soft if overhandled, a few layers together allow shaping and modeling easily. The paper has a very good memory, and after reversing a fold line it goes well in both directions. While I did have some difficulties with the mane, I managed to shape it.
The units, which are simple to fold, are no challenge for this paper. Its texture is a little rough, and the creases are sharp. I managed to puff the flowery part, but not exactly as I wanted. The paper is not highly agile, but thankfully just enough. Friction is high, which helps when connecting the units. Thanks to that the final structure is stable, even though the design has no lock.
This paper is a pleasure to fold with. It’s breaks crisply and remembers a crease wonderfully. I completed the first steps quickly, as the paper gives no reason to slow down. The ears are multi-layered and are often a problem. Not here. I got a strong stable 3D figure that was easy to shape.
This paper is very stiff and responds to your fingers with ease. I blazes through the first steps. Crumples did start to appear on the later, more difficult steps, such as step 58, a closed sink. The paper manipulations required are very evident and give the unwanted effect of "dirty" paper. The first time I was slowed down was when folding the hind legs. Having to fold many layers at once, I needed my bone folder. I struggled a bit while folding the "repeat on the other side" step of the front legs. I had to unfold the section and try again, but thankfully the paper stayed stiff enough to hold the weight of the final model.
At the age of fourteen, Ynon Toledano is our special third opinion reviewer.
The paper folding superbly. It is easy to reverse fold lines. The paper is strong, so there is no need to strengthen it. Shaping is done with no effort, and in my opinion it is highly suitable for every complex model, even insects.
Highly recommended for complex models.
This is probably the most versatile paper we tried. As was earlier said, the numbers from the test results don't reveal its true value. All three of us thoroughly enjoyed folding with it, simple to complex models. It has great memory, feels like a very solid paper and doesn't have any major flaws. Yes, it's not that thin, but it is suitable for complex models, even insects, if you start with a 35cm sheet. It is not a strong paper, but it is far from being weak, or ripping easily. Surprisingly, it was great for tessellation. Modulars benefit from the slightly rough texture.
In flickr, I found only 29 pictures, all of 3D and complex models. Most of them were posted by three folders.
Although the tests revealed average scores, the final result is definitely above average! Being highly suitable for a large variety of models, it is a very smart buy.
Bottom line: highly versatile!

Japanese Foil Review
Unlike Tant and Elephant Hide, which are both brand names and each manufactured by one company, there are many varieties of Japanese Foil. Almost every origami paper manufacturer has Japanese Foil in its product line, just like Kami.
There are two major categories for foil origami paper.
Very little information can be found on this type of paper. However, there is an interesting article by Dr. Robert Lang called Metallic Paper on the history of foil and of how it became an origami paper. It is basically a thin sheet of paper bonded to an even thinner sheet of metal foil (usually aluminum). The mixture of these two elements creates a hybrid paper, alien in its look and unique in character.
I got an interesting reply when I checked with the Japanese manufacturer Toyo Co. Ltd. They are the suppliers for the 35cm pack sold by origami-shop.com. The foil is made in Japan, by Nippon Metal Foil Co. Ltd, so this is a genuine Japanese Foil. The weight is 49gsm, and the thickness is 0.06 mm.  The weight of the foil is 19gsm, which means the paper is 30gsm, wood-free. The manufacturing process is as follows:
I think that when using this paper for traditional, flat models the main focus should not be on the folding quality, but on the look of the final model. It is fun to fold with foil; you get sharp creases with little effort, and with such a thin paper very accurate results. The final model is easy to shape. Bottom line - overkill, but folds well and looks good, especially if you like bright and shiny!
This paper works well for simple action models, but is too soft for complex ones.
The push mechanism works just fine.
The pull mechanism of the flapping bird works nicely, but the paper ripped slightly while trying to ease the paper below the wing (before the first flap action).
The frog only jumped a distance of 20cm to 40cm, but every jump it made three or four summersaults!

This paper is not my first choice for this modular. It was very difficult to make each unit and to puff it. I used Q-tips (cotton buds), gently pushing the paper out from the inside, but got a lot of crumples and paper-breaking-snakes on the surface. Assembling the units was even more difficult. The lack of strength in the paper meant that it was a fight to insert the tabs into the pockets without adding more unnecessary marks. As mentioned earlier, taking a photo of the final spherical result was very problematic due to the excessive reflections.
This modular requires strong paper. Japanese Foil paper won't work for units with deep and tight pockets since it is so thin, i.e. the flaps would not be able to be pushed into the pockets. Also, with so little friction, the model just dismantled when picked up by one unit.
For this paper I have chosen the Ash Tray tessellation, yet another variation of the Pineapple tessellation. Folding the grid was a slow process, since I kept my rule that all folds should be bi-directional. Reversing a fold can be done more easily than one would have thought, but it is tedious work that requires careful handling. It took me twice the usual time to make a 16×16 grid. Pre-folding is yet another annoying job, since every random move of a hand makes unwanted ripples and curves on the surface of the paper. Collapsing was easy until it came to the sharp points and corners. Trying to achieve clean and accurate crease lines proved to be impossible. There is no Snap-Into-Place feeling with this paper. The only good point is the ability to sculpture the final details, for example the curves of the cigarette holders.
This is the only tessellation we folded, since Mystery is designed to show transparency, and Japanese Foil is not transparent at all.
This paper is made for complex models. The only disadvantages are the reverse fold and color loss (cracking) on the creases. This paper is great for this model.
Since Gadi chose the bright side of paper, I once again folded a white pegasus using the paper side as the color side. It wasn't as easy to fold as with Tant, since thickness is not the only factor. Every reverse fold slowed me down, and an open-sink at step 37 was a nightmare. With such a thin paper it was easy to get a nice result, not too fat as with Elephant Hide, and no need to wet fold or glue to keep it in good position, as with Tant. The malleability allows adjusting all details at will; it is easy to shape the the wings and the legs, making sure the model stands equally on three legs.
The thinness of the paper with the stability of the foil is excellent for the Rat. Easy to fold and shape.
Wet folding in this case is totally unnecessary (and not entirely possible!). The foil provides the wet fold benefits. The result is nicely shaped.
Gadi couldn't miss the opportunity to add a paragraph on miniatures. This paper is one of the best I have ever used for tiny folds.
One of the best uses for Japanese Foil. The combination of the paper's ability to hold a shape and its thinness make it perfectly suitable for sculpting legs, horns and antennas into more life-like shapes. Finalizing the model is easy, and takes considerably less time than any wet fold or MC treatment procedure. Moreover, the small size of the final model usually requires a small paper to begin with, making the 35 cm squares more than enough for every insect you want to fold. For some insects, there is also the benefit of the bright side as part of the skeleton.
What is it good for? For traditional use it is great if you like the brilliant effect, otherwise it is overkill. Same applies for action models. For tessellations it is not recommended: there is no transparency and therefore no effect when back-lighting; folding the grid is easier said than done, and collapsing is even harder. For 3D models it's good, no need to wet fold to achieve the desired 3D shaping. Complex models will get a very good result due to the thinness of the paper, but bear in mind that the white side really needs some coloring if the model is to be displayed and/or photographed. Adding the final shaping to complex models also tends to be quicker. Despite the lovely colors and the variety of small sizes, the lack of friction in the paper makes Japanese Foil a questionable choice for modular origami.
This is a unique paper and as such, it is suitable for special projects - mostly complex and high intermediate models, miniatures and 3D models that ask for a lot of molding.
Searching through Flickr for Japanese Foil images, I found only 128 images. The large majority of these were 3D models, including complex and high intermediate models. There were no tessellations and only one modular. Half of the models showed the white side, the other half the foil. I then expanded the search to look for foil. This found 2063 images, but most of them were models folded from Tissue Foil, which is not covered here.
Bottom line: special paper for special projects.
Please write your comments and feedback directly to us:

Ilan Garibi - garibiilan(at)gmail(dot)com

Gadi Vishne - gadi(at)vishne(dot)com
Special thanks to Susser Udi, for his valuable help on coloring and insects folding.
While I agree that Japanese foil is not suitable for some modular models, those that have a strong and/or stable lock will sometimes work quite well. 

In particular, it is my preferred paper for the arabesque unit.
http://www.flickr.co...

I have also found that some Sonobe unit types work well, too.
http://www.flickr.co...
Absolutely, I agree there will always be exceptions. In my opinion Ilan's and Gadi's reviews give suggestions and experiences they made with the paper types. So while in general JP might not be the best choice for modular pieces in general, in some cases it will be a great choice.
Your example shown at http://www.flickr.co... is absolutely stunning!



Lizard Hide
Perhaps trying to profit a bit from the glory of the by now quite iconic Elephant Hide, calling new papers "Hide" has become popular. This was maybe also the case here. Nicolas Terry, who to the best of our knowledge the only person selling this paper, notes that Lizard Hide has a great texture imitating [the] skin of reptiles. Rather thick (96-116 gsm [depending on the color]) and water resistant, it is ideal [for] capturing organic shapes (like flowers and animals since there are many curves to be put in them), for wet-folding as well as [for] tessellations.
We couldn’t find the paper's source, so our review is solely based on our lab tests and the opinion of the four test folders: Guy Loel, Ynon Toledano and the authors, Ilan Garibi and Gadi Vishne. We decided to test it for the suggested types of models only: 3D models, intermediate models, and tessellations.
When folding the 24 by 24 square grid, I started with folding against the grain. Wow, it's so hard to creaes! When placing the second crease, I found it difficult to make the paper where I want it to go. Creasing with the grain is much easier. This echoes the extremely contasting values we got in the machine tests for tensile strength and bending resistance.
Precreasing showed good results, the short fold lines did not expand into the adjacent squares.
Hilula is a tessellation that displays most of the paper – much more than the Pineapple tessellation I usually use to test the paper. The collapse asks for a lot of tensile strength. I was disappointed by the paper here – the paper tends to break instead of bend. Some of the molecules lost their rounded shape because of that. The central square relies on sharp creases holding their place. With Lizard Hide, they weren't quite strong enough. So the final model didn't turn out as elegant as I wanted it to.
I folded just a couple of molecules of the pineapple tessellation to more easily compare this paper to the ones I previously tested. Indeed, Lizard Hide is more suitable for tessellations with flat, simple fold lines. In my opinion the collapse of the tessellation best reveals whether the paper is suitable or not, and this paper make that very easy.
This was the first model I folded from Lizard Hide. The paper is thick and breaks in an ugly way, leaving slightly corrugated edges. Thankfully, a good bone folder helps flattens the paper easily. Step 32 is a closed sink, and here the paper showed how strong it is. Rather than using the clean process Komatsu presents in his book, I simply pushed the corner inside. The paper did not mind this at all. Then several amazing steps follow, which involve wrapping layers around, more sinks, stretches, and the paper responded nicely throughout. The paper didn't break or tear a single time. The final model stand strong and solid.
Guy Loel folded this model.
The paper has the same weight as Elephant Hide, but it feels much heavier and thicker. Still, I found it very nice to fold with, as I got a sense of accuracy, somewhat similar to Tant. This is more obvious when you fold with the grain. When folding against the grain, the crease is jagged, but if you strengthen the crease with your fingernail, it is sharp and nice. The head, which is more complex than the rest of the model, went well, as the paper is big enough.
When shaping the model 3D, the raw edges of the upper jaw got tiny tears  While shaping it into 3D I got tiny tears on the sides of the upper jaw. The paper tension is especially high there. Although the paper is strong, I should have handled it more gently.
The texture is too subtle for my taste. All in all it is a fine paper that folds well, but I prefer Elephant Hide.
I used the paper I colored with red metallic acrylics. As the paper is quite thick, I decidded to use a 20cm square, ratehr than the usual 15cm. As always, the metallic paint gives the paper a plasticy feel, but the nature of the paper remained. Creases must be enforced with a bone folder, but beside that, I had no problem with the model. I paid special attention when forming the ears, which went with ease.
The final model stands firm and looks good. The pattern is slightly toned down, but still visible.
I chose the bear as a test model, as this paper is thick and should allow making round curves. I like the way the paper folds, I got sharp and clear creases. However, adjusting a fold line makes it too weak, and slight pinches don't show – you must make sharp creases.
Shaping the bear was easy, but it didn't stay in place, I had to use adhesive tape. I didn't try to wet fold it, as the paper is so soft.
Ynon Toledano folded this model.
As Lizard Hide is quite thick, I chose a model of intermediate complexity. I would not dare to fold a complex model with a square smaller than 70cm by 70cm.
I liked how the paper holds the creases, but I found it difficult to reverse a fold line. When I folded multiple layers at once, a tear began to form. at the final stages of the model I discovered that it's very easy to shape the model with this paper. And, of course, its best virtue is its texture, which I simply love. All in all, as long as you use a bit larger paper than recommended, this paper is great.
Some tradeoffs were made in this paper. The unique texture required some sacrifices. To emboss the skin-like look, you need a thick, slightly fluffy paper. And because of the many valleys and mountains in that texture, the paper sometimes breaks when you only want to curve it. Even more, the texture weakens the paper, so that two of us got small tears when folding. And finally, because the paper is thick, we had to fold with larger paper than we usually would.
Taking all of this into account, the paper is exactly what it is advertised as – great for intermediate to low complexity models with a unique texture, and better for full body models, rather than flat ones. For tessellations, I have mixed feelings. Collapsing worked well, but I'm not sure whether the texture complements tessellations that well.
We found around 20 models folded from this paper in Flickr. All are intermediate models, 3D animals like rhinos, elephants, a gorilla and a bulldog. We didn't discover any tessellations or folds from other genres.
You have to accept compromises for this texture. So while it is far from the best paper we tested so far, it is still a solid paper, which folds well and has a stunning texture.
Bottom line: beautifully textured paper

Rhombic Flowers (Eric Gjerde)
Two days ago Eric did something very naughty. He wrote:
So it's been a fair while since I've made or posted any crease patterns, and I thought it was about time I did so.
To that end, I've made a CP for a design called "Rhombic Flowers" which is, surprisingly, a tessellation...
http://www.origamite...
For those of you who enjoy folding tessellations, please give it a try and let me know what you think. It's never actually been folded, so I'm pretty curious to see what it looks like when fully completed.
Very naughty indeed! I'm so bad with not accepting such a challenge. So on that day I started my first attempt. You know where this is leading, right? I started with a 64 division triangle grid and added all the rhombi - so far so good. But couldn't quite figure out how to collapse model. I got halfway there, and then gave up. Today I looked at it again and decided that transparent paper wasn't the best choice for the model, and that really I should try a smaller version first. This was a good chance to try using elephant hide. I'd never worked with it before, but heard it was really nice for tessellations. I used the same size of paper, but went for a 32 division triangle grid. And this is the result. I have to admit I drew in the crease lines on the back -- and that was a great help. And you can't tell when looking at the front. So I'm not showing my usual "front and back" of a tessellation. I should have used a pencil rather than a pen - or not mess up a couple of times with drawing in the creases. Ah...
Anyway, the model's quite nice, although I'm still not as comfortable with making rhombic twists as I'd like. I think they're the hardest of the bunch (triange, square, rhombic, hexagon). And you can learn from it at least this: drawing in creases often helps -- and is absolutely acceptable.
Paper: hexagon from a 19.5cm square of elephant hide (side length: 9.7cm)
Model: hexagon with side length 6.9cm
if there are more valley folds than mountain folds at a point, that point is concave
    if there are more mountain folds at a point, that point is convex
What i usually do is fold sum of the creases and try to "semi- collapse" it at the same time.  Hopefully this will help.
-Daniel
Are you by any chance Daniel Kwan? If not, look him up. He's reeeely cool.
I recently started making tessellations- I learnt them from you!
So right now I find it a little difficult to follow crease patterns.. especially the ones without the guideline grid..
How do I do a rhombic twist??
I have vague plans to make some videos on more @tessellation techniques - the rhombic twist would be one of them.

More information about text formats

Nicolas Terry Tissue Foil Review
Tissue Foil is a rare product. The combination of the stiffness and strong memory of the foil, with the look and agility of the tissue paper makes a promising paper to answer many of our paper-folding needs. For year now the only solution to obtaining tissue foil was to make your own and many still do.
To make some, you have to bond foil (sold as a kitchen product) with whatever Tissue paper you have. Truth be told, it's a lot of hassle, and it's difficult to obtain a perfect result. That is why we were happy to see what may be the perfect solution - Ready Made Tissue Foil.
It is sold exclusively in Nicolas Terry's online shop (origami-shop.com), and everything about it is kept secret. I know it is made by a Thai paper mill, but have no idea where, or what the ingredients are.  All I can say about the paper is purely from our experience folding it,  but is it good as it should be?
Although all colors are sold under the same title, there are some major differences between the various colors, and sometimes between same colors but different sizes. This may be due to the manufacturing process or variations in the materials used. However, since it is sold together as a pack, we will consider that as one paper type, with variations.
Texture: The tissue side is a bit rough, and has the look and feel of a high end handmade paper. The pulp was spread unevenly, as can be seen with some back light. The foil side doesn't appear to be a real foil, but more like a sprayed metallic color has been applied. This is a guess, but it is reinforced by the glitter that stuck to my fingers during folding. It also seems that every sheet or batch of sheets is soaked for a different length of time in the paint. This causes each color to behave a little differently. The brown is stiff while the Champagne is soggy. All other colors are in between, but more on the stiff side.


Supporting my guess about how it is made, the paper is slightly translucent. I put the white paper on a book and I could read the title. All the other papers allow a little light to go through (see the detail of the Pineapple tessellation).


Unlike foil, there is no sharp reflection from the foil side. Although it has a matte finish, it glitters in the light.
It felt like overkill - the paper is too good to be used for simple models as such.  Nevertheless, if you can afford it - it is highly recommended.
The push mechanism worked just fine with the dog (made from Gold paper).
The bird, from Champagne paper held its wings, but looked a bit tired, so to speak.
I used the Brown paper for the frog, but I was unable to determine the direction of the  grain by hand. It is the stiffest paper, and the frog I made performed many somersaults, but didn't jump very far.
I decided to use the golden paper, with the shiny side up. I have never folded such an accurate grid. Usually the paper tends to distort while being folded with many parallel lines, but not this paper. There was little  difference between “with” and “against and both were very easy to reverse. My hands were covered with golden dust during the process, which strengthens my theory about the foil side being sprayed.  Pre-creases went perfectly well; the crease line on the tissue side is highly visible, and the diagonal lines tend to fall exactly on all the crossings of the grid. The collapse was easy with all the outer molecules. The centre molecules are usually difficult to handle, but here it was no big deal. Again the paper keeps its square proportions, so all molecules look the same and undistorted. The final result, as well as the process, is very satisfying!
I saw no point in making the sheet smaller, so 40 cm was the size. “Being a mythical creature”, my wife said, “go with the shiny side”, so I, obediently, did. Folding went easy, it's like the paper is helping you, going exactly where you want it to go. “Can it be that good?,” you ask yourself in the process. The sinking of the belly was done sharply. The shaping of the legs, head and tail went well, but for the tiny details of the hooves I still felt the paper was too thick.
Yeah, it's not the usual size, but I didn't want to cut it. I had a difficult time choosing - not only the color, but also which side up. I chose the brown/bronze paper, and the tissue side up From the first fold, the experience was wonderful! It's a perfect paper for box pleating. Every step is just easy. Reversing a fold - a piece of cake. Open sink - no problem. Close sink - just the same. The wing tips are so sharp - what a pleasure!
The blue tissue foil gave me a fight in the last steps, since the unicorn is made with many layers of paper, as you can see in the head. The final shaping holds well, as one can expect from a paper that has foil in its name.
Making the details of the dwarf`s face asked for many stretches and pulls with a tweezers and no tears occurred. With the Champagne it was not easy to reverse folds. The final shaping holds well, as one can expect from a paper that has foil in its name.
I made the units using 4 colors. The brown behaved perfectly. Easy to fold, reverse fold and the puff went well. The curved surface of the unit is very strong. The light gold was too soft. It was folded alright but the tabs felt too weak. Assembling went well, and the final result is just lovely.
I chose the wrong paper - the champagne color. It is too weak to hold the rat on its legs. This paper is softer than the other ones, and I found that reversing a fold is a bit tedious. But beside that all went just flowingly. It is an excellent paper to fold with.
It is a simple model, and the paper made it even easier to fold. Shaping the ears, legs, head and tail using the foil advantages is easy, but I was surprised to see the legs open up to the sides more than I thought it would. That is why I decided to try some wet folding. Yes, wet folding on a foil paper seems to be useless but here it worked perfectly. Since I used the tissue side on the outside, it did absorb some humidity that allowed me to shape the legs at will. After just a few minutes it was dry and well shaped!
Foil papers are made to make 3D animals easily, so I tried to dry fold this model. For this model, and the way Giang teaches his models, there are no definite instructions: “fold around here to somewhere in between”.  So I got the head too little, but the general shape as well as the legs and body contour went very well. The paper is strong and stiff enough to be shaped at will.
This is definitely a favorite. One of the best papers we have ever tested or used. It's as if it was made for origamists. Hey, wait, it IS made for origamists, and it is doing its job perfectly. It's strong, yet thin; it is stiff, yet folds easily; it has a beautiful palette of colors, and it comes in all the right sizes.
Folding simple models is an easy task, as well as simple action models. For modulars it has the look as well as the friction to hold units together. 3D models benefits from its foil side for shaping and the Tissue side for the texture. For complex models it is highly suitable, making you a better folder. For tessellations it is surprisingly excellent. It's easy to fold an accurate grid and it has a “snap into place” collapse. Like any other foil paper it's not really suitable for wet folding, but for extra shaping a little spray of water works very well.
In flickr - 1,555 results came from searching for Tissue Foil, but most are handmade papers. I narrowed it down by adding “Terry” to the search, and got 229 images. In both cases Tissue Foil is used for 3D animals and complex models, many are insects. It is rarely used for complex stars, and neither real tessellation nor modulars have been spotted.
Bottom line: one of the best!
Approximately a year ago i folded Skuki Kato's Western dragon and also Kamiya's Phoenix with this paper and when I compare pictures from directly after the fold with now I noticed that the color has bleached quite a bit. The red of the dragon looks more like a light red now (almost a rosy pink) and the yellow of the phoenix is also a couple shades lighter now. Also both models were standing in places with no direct sun onto them
Hi,
A month ago I've tried to wet fold brown tissue foil for a model, but, when I'd added water to the sheet it began to loose brown paint.
It is normal? Your review doesn't say anything about this...
Thanks and sorry for my English.
Hi I've used this paper a couple of times (but only the gold variant which has sparkles) but don't know if green Nicholas terry tissue foil (probably 60x60cm) would be suitable for Jason Ku's HJ rex he made. I know that this paper can hold the shape very well and the size will be plenty to make this model comfortably but just by looking at the model I was concerned about the thickness of this foil and how it would hold up against the many layers of this HJ rex and if these would lead to problems with shaping the model. And if I should just stick to another paper (that holds the shape, is thin and strong) and what would be a good recommendation for a model like this.
Thanks.
I personally hate this paper, the score you gave it is way too high. In my opinion printer paper deserves a higher score. Every time I have used this paper it fails. One of the weakest paper I have ever used, doesn’t do well with lots of layers. I tried to make oriol esteves squirrel and I didn’t turn out. Also tried with Lang’s redpath pteranedon and it failed. It rips very easily and would rate almost every paper higher than this. In my experience, this is one of the worst papers I have used. Lokta is so much better especially with mc for shaping.

Your Origami Folds November 2015: Sakura Star (Ali Bahmani)
Here are the pictures you sent me showing your folds of the "Sakura Star" designed by Ali Bahmani or one of its variations. Thanks for all your submissions!

Your websites:

Claudia origami-time: http://origami-time....
Felix Suerbe: http://fsorigami.wee...
Clint Yang: http://www.flickr.co...

Background music: "Daytime TV Theme" by Kevin MacLeod 
Daytime TV Theme by Kevin MacLeod is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution license (https://creativecomm...)
Source: http://incompetech.c...
Artist: http://incompetech.c...

To take part in the next "Your Origami Folds" send a photo of your fold of a "Triphilia" tessellation discovered by Robin Scholz to sara@happyfolding.com by December 12th 2015. Be sure to include a message allowing me to use your photo in the video.
I know that you have gotten a lot of requests to do this model, so I was wondering if you were planning on doing it any time soon?
Fastidiously,
                      ~Damian Preklopiti ♥♦♣♠
Merry Christmas! Hope you have (or had) a wonderful day!
Happy New Year, Sara! Hope you have a wonderful and blessed (and, of course, origami-filled) 2016!
Stupendously,
                         ~Damian ☺
More information about text formats

Triphilia (Robin Scholz)
Paper: hexagon with a height of 24 cm (9.5 in), light blue Elephant Hide
Model: hexagon with a height of 11.7 cm (4 5/8 in)
I really like the folding sequence for this one!
Where did you learn to fold this model?
Robin showed me how to fold it at the CDO Convention that took place in Italy December 2014. If all goes well, I'll post a tutorial for it in September 2015.

More information about text formats

Contact Ilan Garibi

Lots of new technique videos
After a recording and editing marathon, I've added lots of new technique videos. They include @tessellation techniques, as well as two videos on how to prepare origami paper. A video showing some of the tessellations I folded will be up in the next 2 hours or so.

And here they are:
How to fold a triangle grid How to form a triangle twist How to form a 120 degree pleat intersection How to form a 120 degree inverted pleat intersection How to form a 60 degree pleat intersection How to form a hexagon twist How to make tissue foil How to make double tissue 

Hope you have fun watching the new material. I know it took more than my usual month to upload the next video, but I hope that it was worth the wait. Also, I plan to make more @tessellation technique videos. Still to come will probably be:

square grid (maybe)
90 degree pleat intersection
rabbit ear triangle sink
square twist
rhombus twist
open back triangle twist
open back square twist
open back hexagon twist

Those will have to wait for a bit, though. But hopefully the new videos should keep you busy for a while.

Happy folding and experimenting,


I live in Swiss , near Germany . In your Video: "Making Tissue Foil: Instructions" do you use a glu. What´s the name of the glue? Perhaps I can buy the same .
P.S Sorry for the bad English
MaXi
I use "Wandbelagskleber", the exact product is shown at http://www.metylan.d...


Thanks
MaXi
thanks for videos, i am waiting for the next ones :)
Dear Sara,
I was trying to make "rabbit ear triangle sink".  I have "Origami @Tessellations: Awe-Inspiring Geometric Designs"--Eric Gjerde, but not able to follow last step (p. 15, step 5).  I am bite confused weather to do repeat steps 1to 4 (p. 15) on last two sides  or only to one side.  I am not getting Figure 43 (p. 15) after repeating 1 to 4 on one side.
Thanks in advance.
Best regards,
Archana.
Dear Sara,
Sorry for troubling you by the previous message.  I was making a big mistake of rotating paper by 120 degrees instead of 180 degrees in step 5 .  Now I made it.
Sorry again,
Best regards,
Archana.
Thanks for the great ideas! I've never tried folding before - is it hard to begin?
More information about text formats

Two new articles for The Fold
It is my pleasure to anounce two new articles which I authored for Origami USA's The Fold.
After having completed the next set of @tessellation technique videos, I felt it'd be good to give a summary of the videos I've done on tessellation so far, in particular with respect to helping people get started. Thus came about @Tessellations and How to Get Started.
And you might have already seen my video where I rave about the book "Spiral: Origami | Art | Design" by Tomoko Fuse. I've now also written a review on this fantastic book, including more details on the contents: Review: "Spiral: Origami | Art | Design" by Tomoko Fuse

I am voting for no. 3! Thank you for introducing this beautiful book. Looking forward to your video.
More information about text formats

Giveaway Day 10 of 10: 10 years on YouTube
To take part:
1. Subscribe to my channel
2. Comment on https://youtu.be/ZAs... using the hashtag #awesomeorigami and let me know which of the five models you'd like to receive most: the tessellation, the corrugation, the dragon, the mouse or the mask.
Deadline: July 8th 2017

To celebrate my 10-year YouTube anniversary and to thank you for all your support throughout the years, I'm doing 10 days of giveaways and this is the last day!

Today's prize: 5 models folded from different origami artists

Tessellation: "Something changed" by Robin Scholz
Flickr stream: https://www.flickr.c...
Photo of this model: https://www.flickr.c...

Corrugation: "Chevron Corrugation" by Michał Kosmulski
Flickr stream: https://www.flickr.c...
Instructions: https://www.flickr.c...
Website: http://michal.kosmul...

Dragon: "Devil's Tongue Dragon" by Gregor Müller
Flickr stream: https://www.flickr.c...
YouTube channel: https://www.youtube....
Tutorial: https://youtu.be/MbF...

Mouse by Alexander Kurth
Flickr stream: https://www.flickr.c...
YouTube channel: https://www.youtube....
Wetfolding basics tutorial: https://youtu.be/Gyz...
Wetfolding rose tutorial: https://youtu.be/rt3...

Mask: "Mirror Mirror" by Daniel Chang (mitanei)
Flickr stream: https://www.flickr.c...
Photo of this model: https://www.flickr.c...
Website: https://keepfoldingo...
I like the tesselation from Robin Scholz most. So this is for me the #awesomeorigami. Thank you for your video's, Sara and hope to "see" you soon on youtube!
More information about text formats

Snowflake (Dennis Walker)
Isn't this a beautiful snowflake model? And it's quite easy to fold, too.
Paper: hexagon from a 19.5cm square of transparent paper (side length: 9.75cm)
Model: diameter of 9.75cm
Can I use butter paper instead of  a transparent paper?
If I am thinking of the right paper, then, yes, butter paper should work well for this model.

What about using butter paper for any other @tessellation model? eg: hydrangea or clover folding?
Will that help to create an alternative for transpaernt paper?
You can always try. I'm not sure how easily butter paper breaks. For the snowflower you don't really have to reverse folds, but for tessellations you often do. If the paper breaks easily, then it's not as suitable for tessellations. If you want to test this, fold the paper back and forth a couple of times, making strong creases each time. If the paper breaks in that crease, then that might also happen when folding the tessellation.

I followed you to the end, but the last folds just have me confounded.
More information about text formats

Stacked Triangles (Eric Gjerde)
Some time ago I started this tessellation, and didn't have time to finish it. I'd only done the grid and the first rabbit-ear triangle sink fold. I had a hard time figuring out how to do that one. Today I decided to complete it, and thankfully I immediately got how to do the rabbit-ear triangle sink fold, and after some fiddling this is the result. The pictures shows the model from both sides. Given the name, I'd say the right one is the front view, and also the side I think I prefer. But with tessellations you can always decide which side you like best.
Paper: hexagon from a 19.5cm square of transparent paper (side length of hexagon: 10.5cm)
Model: hexagon with a side length of 5.5cm
Rabbit-ear triangle sink fold?
That almost sounds like Inside reverse fold when I first started origami.Cool Awsome model though.
I completely agree that it's a rather unfortunate name for the fold, but I was at quite a loss about what to call it. It's a triangle sink, of sorts, and a rabbit ear maneuver as well, and thusly for lack of a better name I called it what it is. Hopefully the readers will forgive me (in time)... :)
It's a very handy folding technique for tessellations, and works with shapes besides 60 degree angles. I've done some fun stuff with octagons using this same method.
There's a model later on in the book that combines hex twists and this technique to make a more complicated result, which I think shows the value of tessellations quite well - you can combine things together to make bigger, better designs, the only limit is your own ability to fold and your ingenuity.
Thanks for sharing this, Sara!
-Eric
try backlighting the origami stacked triangles
The method that is used to create the triangles is actually the same method that Eric used for his 2.1 version star.
Are there no videos for this tessellation?
Or you didnt contact the designer?
I would like a video soon on this.
Bye
I might do a video on this in the future, but I'm not sure. Please remember that I usually make instructions for one video a month, so in terms of internet time I am anything but fast.

I now how you made this. I already made Spead-Hex, Four and Five, the Waterbomb (that was 1 day before you made a video) and Star Puff. And I dont got the book!!!
How many divisios did you use here? Then I can make this model to!
I love your videos Sara!!!
Lars, 12 year, Holland
Looking at the picture, I'll have to guess 32 divisions.

i seen others this is one of the best ive seen nice chose of paper..... the right looks like icecubes and the left looks like iceblocks well thats what i think
i just wanted to say that about it looking like ice
This is an awesome model! thank you for sharing
More information about text formats

Spread Hexagons (Eric Gjerde)
Yesterday night I first tried the model on a triangle grid with 16 pleat divisions to get a feel for how to do the model. I then moved to transparent paper, and had this stupid idea of doing a triangle grid 64 pleat divisions instead. Hours later... this is the result. This is what robs my sleep!
Paper: 19.5cm square of transparent paper
Model: 15.3cm x 13.7cm
It looks amazing!  I only moved on to 32 pleat divisions.  By the way the diagrams of this tessellation is also located in Eric's blog.  Here is the link: http://www.origamite...
64 pleat division.. That's insane! I've only gone to 32 on a 15x15cm sheet so far, so your triangles are nearly twice as small as the ones I made. I'm quite amazed by the fact that you managed to crease everything quite precisely at this microscopic size.
I think tessellations will help me improve my precision. I also found that transparent paper helped me align creases, and thus get higher accuracy. Plus, of course, you get nice effects when applying back lighting to the finished model, as I did for this picture.
This will help with your fish scales too! (the koi fish project, remember, Sara???)
I do remember, and I've had the same thought already. :)

Mathematically speaking, a hexagon is the perfect shape, since it holds basic principles in all 9 dimensions.
You've done a fantastic job here - wow! And I also can't believe you jumped right into a 64-division folding job... that's pretty amazing.
Thanks for sharing this, I'm really pleased to see such happy feedback! :)
Please make a video on this tessellation.
PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE
do you have to do triangle twists on this model because i could see that there are little triangles on the hexagons and eric gjerde made instructions on how to make hexagons by triangle twists on his website.
This model is solely based on 120 degree pleat intersections. You do not need any triangle twists.

That is excellent! I really thank you for your videos, look on my crazy idea :) http://picasaweb.goo...
I made the one with 32 divisions and that was hard too.
you guys i buy the book yust waths this video http://www.youtube.c...
http://imgur.com/6N62q

I made this out of a regular square cut out of a sheet of A4 copy paper. I went ahead and did all the hexagons all the way to the edge of the paper on two sides so I could have a regular hexagon as the overall result. Thanks for looking.
That looks great! You worked very precisely. :)

More information about text formats

Square Interlace Box (Michał Kosmulski): Instructions
Paper used:
Lid: square with a side length of 35 cm (13 3/4 in)
Box: square with a side length of 23.5 cm (9 1/4 in)

Finished model:
side length of 8.25 cm (3 1/4 in)
height of 4 cm (1 9/16 in)

This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami box featuring the Square Interlace Tessellation designed by Michał Kosmulski.
Michał kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
please email me this video as I am very interested in making this box.
Thank You
More information about text formats

Square Interlace Bracelet (Michał Kosmulski): Instructions
Paper size for the bronze bracelet: 57.75 cm by  9 cm (approx. 22 3/4 in by 3 1/2 in)
Paper type: Stardream 
Finished model: width of 2 cm (3/4 in), diameter of 7 cm (2 3/4 in), circumference of 22 cm (8 5/8 in)

This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami bracelet featuring the Square Interlace Tessellation designed by Michał Kosmulski).
Michał kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you.
This isn't actually my first. I can't remember which of your videos I saw first. I have made a couple of these bracelets, and each time, it gets quite a bit of attention. I ended up giving each one away.
More information about text formats

Star Puff (Ralf Konrad)
I was really intrigued by this model, because of its 3-d finish. Apart from having seen faces and such formed from tessellations, I had really associated tessellations with being essentially flat. Another surprise was that you first have to fold spread hexagons, and that model then very easily transforms into the star puff.
Paper: 19.5cm square of transparent paper
Model: 4.1cm x 12.2cm x 0.8cm
A small little comment you missed Sara.  Actually first you have to make the spread hexagon tessellation, then you squash down each hexagon point into a triangle(since three pleats meet at one point) and keep doing that until you get the pattern in your picture.  Other than that, great job!  I've made mine when I was riding a bus to a camp.  I found the instructions on the origami forum.
hi would you mind posting a link of the instructions?
I don't think there are online instructions to this model, but it's quite simple. Fold a triangle grid, then make 6 adjoining triangle twists. They will form a hexagon that is made up of 6 triangles. Then fold each triangle in half, thus exposing a hexagon on a single layer (i.e. no edges on top). You can then make that hexagon 3D by pushing in the sides, thus forming one star. Make as many stars as you like.

must have taken a loooooot of patience...
Actually, It doesn't take that much patience. If you actually get used to folding this kind of stuff, It doesn't take that long.
where do you get those paper?
I bought this paper from the BOS store: http://supplies.brit...

Please make a video on this tessellation.
PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE
I contacted Ralf Konrad recently, and am waiting for his reply. If he gives me permission, this might be one of the next models I'll make a video on.

what grid was this put on?
A 32-division grid.

just one more question:where do you put the first triangle twist(for the center)
Try watching the video to see how to place the triangle twists: http://www.happyfold...


More information about text formats

Box for Sara (Robin Scholz)
Paper:
Lid: square with a side length of 24 cm, red Biotop 
Base: square with a side length of 24 cm, beige Vintage 

Model:
Lid: side length of 6.5 cm, height of 3 cm
Base: side length of 6 cm, height of 6 cm

Robin came up with this tessellation and was generous enough to share instructions with me. It took quite a while to fold, but I really like the look. For the base, I went with a traditional Masu.
More information about text formats

Making of Printer Paper
by Ilan Garibi, edited by Sara Adams
07:15. My alarm clock goes off. It's the start of an exciting day. I go over my checklist to make sure I am ready for this trip:
I'm all set!
Today I am going to visit the Paper Mill at Hadera, Israel, a town 10 km south of my home. I had folded models for the new cover design of the copy paper packages. As a gift, I received an invitation to visit the mill. Three hours later, I am by the gate. My host, Shalom, greets me and presents me with the necessary security pass.
Hadera Paper Mill has several factories and employs 800 people in total. It is a huge place. I am going to see the white paper machine. "Machine" may be an understatement since the hangar that houses it is 350 meters (382 yards) long! The Machine itself is 200 meters (218 yards) long, 4 stories high and costs around 150 million Euros (approximately 217 million USD).
The first thing I spot are the cellulose packages. Paper is made from cellulose extracted from trees. Here they work with cellulose originating from Chile, South Africa, Brazil, Canada, Portugal, and Scandinavia. The cellulose is delivered in a dry form and the main difference between the different types is the length of the fibers. In the paper industry, 3-4mm (about 1/8 inches) fibers are considered long! Short fiber cellulose comes from the harder wood, brownish or dark in color. The long fibers come from conifer. All the cellulose is from trees grown for this purpose only! Naturally grown wood is not used to make paper any more.
The first step for making paper is to dilute the cellulose in water. There are 3 containers, one for short fibers, one for long ones, and one for all recycled, raw materials. Long fiber paper is stronger and suitable for example for packing sugar. On the other hand, short fiber paper is intended for normal use, such as books and copy paper. For each type of paper, the right mixture of short and long fibers is important and it is at this stage that the mix is established.
It’s the production of printer paper we are looking at, so the mix mostly includes short fibers.
At this point, one more ingredient is added: chalk. This helps make the paper whiter and smoother, because the chalk will fill in all the spaces between the fibers.
The next step is to grind and separate the fibers into micro-fibers. At this point the mixture consists of 94% water!
The mix is then cleaned in cyclone filters. Every little stone or other impurity would cause the paper to tear and must therefore be cleared.
Just like when making handmade paper, it is now time to spread the mixture on a screen. When making handmade paper these screens are small enough for a person to hold and handle. Not here! The mixture is spread on a 5.2 meter (17 feet) wide and 46 meter (150 feet) long net, which is stretched over a number of drums. The mixture flows through 40 nozzles, computer controlled to ensure the pulp is distributed on the rotating screen in an even thickness. The mixture is 99.5% water at this point! This means that for every pound of paper you need around 100 pounds of water. This is the stage that consumes most water. One of the major factors in making paper ecological is re-using the water as often as possible!
At this stage some colors are added to the mixture. Every paper mill has its own combination of added colors. Here they add blue and purple. The amount is tiny, but it is enough to balance out the yellowish color of the pulp and to bring out the desired white.
And that's it! The paper is ready, but saturated with water. From now on, the machine works to remove the water. The wet paper (now 78% water) moves to the felt drums. The paper, 17 feet wide and seemingly endless, is squeezed between two layers of felt, taking out roughly half of the water. The remaining water is going to be vaporized in the oven.
Once the paper is dry, it is wetted again, but this time with starch. This will make the paper stronger. It makes sure all fibers are flattened down without any hair-like fibers remaining, which would be problematic for ink-printers; and it slows the water absorption, which is important for off-set printing.
Now, of course, the paper has to be dried again! This time a special drum is used. It's full of tiny holes and filled with high pressure air, so that there is no actual contact between the drum face and the wet paper! The paper in fact rotates on air, any contact between the sticky, starch-soaked paper and the drum surface is avoided.
The next station of the machine is all about pressing. To make sure the thickness of the paper is even, there is a sensor that measures it constantly and controls the pressure of the drums by adjusting their temperature. Simply put, if the paper is too thick, the drum is heated, therefore expanding the drum just enough to thin the paper.
Now it is time to monitor the final result. A line of 16 CCD cameras is continuously monitoring the paper, all 17 feet width of it. The cameras send all irregularities to a computer in the control room. The control room software looks for any patterns in the irregularities. The frequency of the problem helps to find the source for it. Since every stage in the paper making process uses drums, and every drum has a unique diameter in accordance to its function, you can deduce the villain just by examining the distance between holes or stains.
And what's the final output of the machine? It's a a roll of paper that's 17 feet wide, 31 miles long (!), and 20 tons heavy. If required, the machine can also cut it up into 14 smaller rolls.
Cutting these rolls of paper into standard-sized printer paper and packaging these is done with another machine. I have little interest in this procedure, although I can sit and stare for hours at the belt that carries the paper to be packed.
I am more interested in the laboratory. Here the paper is examined and tested to measure its quality and to make sure that its characteristics fall within the required norms. The temperature and humidity in the laboratory are constantly monitored, maintaining a temperature of 22 degrees Celsius (68 degrees Fahrenheit) and 60% humidity.
Tsvika greets me, he's in charge of the quality assurance testing. But first he has to take some samples from the length of the giant paper roll. Then he starts with the water absorption test. For this he first takes a sheet of a fixed size, weighs it, puts a metal ring on it, and then adds a specific amount of water. After 45 seconds he drains the water and re-weighs the wet paper. The difference in weight reveals how much water the paper absorbed.
Next up is the tensile test machine. Tsvika puts a strip of paper, 1cm wide and 20cm long (about 0.4in by 8in), between two holding points. The machine then stretches the paper until it tears. Amazingly, the paper stretches visibly: 3.67mm (over 1/8in) along the grain! For comparison, we also test the Elephant Hide I brought along. It stretches by 17mm (2/3in) before it tears!
The final test I observe is done with a tearing machine. It measures the paper's resistance once the edge has a small tear.
And of course there are more testing machines. For example, they measure the white level of the paper, the width of it, and the angle of the curve made by the heat of a copy machine. Every aspect of the paper can be tested here, and I have full clearance to use it all. This will allow Gadi and me to scientifically enhance our Paper Review project, with accurate measurements of paper properties for Elephant Hide, Tant, Japanese Foil, Origamido, Kraft, Kami  and many others.

The trip is over. During the two hours of my visit, the machine - working at an amazing speed of 25 mph - managed to make more paper then I could fold in my lifetime! I thank my host and give him the gift, a tessellation made from Hadera paper. In return he gave me a piece of paper, 17 feet by a few yards, which he cut from the end of the roll. Sounds like a perfect paper for a 1024 grid! I guess I will be busy in this coming year...
Finally, don't forget to also read our paper review on printer paper, which is also published here!

Star Clarissa (Carmen Sprung)
Paper: 8 sheets of translucent paper, 7.5cm by 7.5cm
Model: diameter of 15cm
Oh wow, I love how The colour goes from a yellow to a dark orange colour just with the layering!  Beautiful fold as always!  I folded Tom Hulls Hexagonal Lace Tessellation using white glassine and it looks great when held up to the window.
More information about text formats

Aztec Twist (Eric Gjerde): Pearlescent Paper
The paper choice wasn't the best, but I was happy that I managed to complete this tessellation without too many problems. I'll have to fold this again with better paper.
Paper: hexagon with a side length of 7.5cm (from a 15cm square), mother-of-pearl paper
Model: hexagon with a side length of 4.7cm
I think you've done a great job folding this.  When i folded the Rhombic Flowers it was a disaster.  By the way, I think Eric has a crease pattern of the aztec twist on his website.
-Daniel
where can you get the paper you used forr the model
Try searching for pearlescent origami paper. It is sold at different origami stores online.

hi sara does this model use rabit ear triangle sink folds?
Yes, it does, that, and hexagon twists and triangle twists.

Could you make a tutorial? I tried to make it from the book, but it turned out so crapaflapnasty.
More information about text formats

Your Origami Folds September 2014: "Five-and-Four" by Eric Gjerde
Here are the pictures you sent me showing your folds of the "Five-and-Four" tessellation by Eric Gjerde. Thanks for all your submissions!
Your websites:
Background music: "Where I am From" by Topher Mohr and Alex Elena
To take part in the next "Your Origami Folds" send a photo of your fold of "Star Bowl" designed by Dáša Ševerová ( http://youtu.be/2y1q... ) to sara@happyfolding.com by October 11th 2014. Be sure to include a message allowing me to use your photo in the video.
Links mentioned in the video:

More information about text formats

Square Weave (Eric Gjerde)
Paper: 42.5cm by 30cm rectangle of handmade Kozo (by Ioana Stoian)
Model: 31.5cm by 22.5cm

After folding a tessellation from the first of two sheets I received from Ioana (thank you!) in the middle of the night I woke up feeling that itch in my fingers.

I decided to go with a square weave for the second sheet. I colored the paper with Faber-Castell Art Grip Aquarelle again, using 147, 162, 104, 109 118. If I could change anything, I'd make the blue/green colors a bit stronger. Still, I'm happy with the result.
More information about text formats

Triangle Tess Pattern (Daniel Kwan)
This was probably the most difficult tessellation I've folded thus far. Collapsing is no fun, it basically has to happen all at once!

Paper: hexagon with a side length of 10.5cm (diameter: 21cm), elephant hide
Model: hexagon with a diameter of 13.5cm
It might be a fingerkiller, but the result looks great, especially in Elephant Hide!
where did you find diagrams for it?
I've added a link to the crease pattern: https://www.flickr.com/photos/8303956@N08/3223096338 
I initially folded this, because it was part of the 1 International Origami Internet-Olympiad 2011.


Hi, the link here doesn't work anymore. Are there any other diagrams?
More information about text formats

Will you be my Valentine? (Stacy Mannes): Instructions
Paper used in this video: 24cm square of kami (9.5in), 7cm square of kami (2.75in)
Finished model: height of 11cm (4.5in), width of 8cm (3in), small heart: width of 4cm (1.5in)
Didn't you mention this in another video?
Yes, I mentioned it in the long version of the @tessellation guide. :)

Thanks for the video! :)  I watched over it and now I know why I shouldn't use a 15cm square for the standing heart. Now, all I need is big paper!
hi sara!...i love your origami models...erm when are you going to make the "Llopio's Moment Of Truth" model?...i ask as you have said that your going to make it for quite a while now...i keep expecting the video...
Life is really stressful right now, so I've had to push that video back again and again. In the end, I fear, my video project is just a hobby and I have to ensure that my work and dissertation don't suffer from it. Hope you understand.

yes i understand. take your time. don't rush into i.
aslong as it is a good video in the end, im happy...:)
Hi
Is really nice and beauty your creation. I would like to have the diagrama but the link dosen´t work..could you help me please.
Thanks very much
The link works for me. Can you try again? It may take some time to load, as it's a bigger file.

Hallo Sara,
vielen Dank für deine Erklärungen. Dank deines Videos ist es mir - nach ein paar missglückten Versuchen- gelungen, das "Herz auf Beinen" zu falten.
Deine Beschreibung ist immer so detailliert, deine  Videos sind ganz wunderbar!
Eva
What happened to the diagram pdf?
More information about text formats

Your Origami Folds June 2015: Coral Star (Ekaterina Lukasheva)
Here are the pictures you sent me showing your folds of the "Coral Star" designed by Ekaterina Lukasheva. Thanks for all your submissions!


Your websites:


Clint Yang: https://www.flickr.c...
Florence Olinares: https://www.flickr.c...
Aender Santos: http://origamidiario...
Alphonsus Rouis: https://www.flickr.c...
MD. Ashraful Absar: https://www.facebook...
Anita R.: http://www.flickr.co...
Xuan: http://paperprojects...

Background music: "Morning Walk" by Jingle Punks 

To take part in the next "Your Origami Folds" send a photo of your fold of a tessellation that includes at least one "Celtic Circle" molecule discovered by Robin Scholz to sara@happyfolding.com by July 11th 2015. Be sure to include a message allowing me to use your photo in the video.
More information about text formats

Giveaway Day 8 of 10: 10 years on YouTube
To take part:
1. Subscribe to my channel: https://www.youtube....
2. Comment on https://youtu.be/yQM... using the hashtag #myfavorite and let me know which of the models I folded you'd like to win most: the dog, the skull, the star, the bracelet, or the tessellation.
Deadline: July 8th 2017

To celebrate my 10-year YouTube anniversary and to thank you for all your support throughout the years, I'm doing 10 days of giveaways and this is the eighth day!

Today's prize: 5 models I folded




More information about text formats

Square Weave (Eric Gjerde): Time lapse
Paper: 42.5cm by 30cm rectangle of handmade Kozo (by Ioana Stoian)
Model: 31.5cm by 22.5cm
After folding a tessellation from the first of two sheets I received from Ioana (thank you!) in the middle of the night I woke up feeling that itch in my fingers.
I decided to go with a square weave for the second sheet. I colored the paper with Faber-Castell Art Grip Aquarelle again, using 147, 162, 104, 109 118. If I could change anything, I'd make the blue/green colors a bit stronger. Still, I'm happy with the result.
This video is sped up by factor 60 - so one minute of video corresponds to one hour of actual folding.
What music did you use for this one?
~Keith! Meyers!!
P.S. Hopefully the italic coding I used worked.
I guess it didn't.
More information about text formats

Shadowfolds: Surprisingly Easy-to-Make Geometric Designs in Fabric
I have not tried origami  in cloth so I wanted how good this book is.
Is it really worth the 18 dollars for just 15 models?
I have to decide between this or 'Origami Flowers: Popular Blossoms and Creative Bouquets' by Hiromi Hayashi.
Which is the best between the two and which has a good variety?
Thank You
Well, that depends on what you want to do - fold with paper, or apply @tessellation techniques to fabric. I have to admit I mostly bought the book out of interest, and because I admire Chris Palmer's work. I'm not sure I'll actually fold with fabric, but I still really appreciate the book.


Turtle "Chelone": Instructions
Paper used in this video: 49 cm by 34.5 cm (19 1/4 in by 13 1/2 in), Elephant Hide colored with acrylics
Finished model: 20 cm by 13 cm by 4.5 cm (8 in by 5 in by 1 3/4 in)
This video describes how to fold a fantastic origami turtle called "Chelone" designed by Melina "Yureiko" Hermsen. It uses @tessellation techniques to achieve the pattern on the turtle's shell.
Melina kindly gave me permission to make this video accessible to you. Do check out her Flickr stream for more of her fantastic work.
Thanks so much for your wonderful videos with clear instructions and a calm voice which gives me the confidence to get stuck in.  I've only been folding for six month but I'm completely hooked.  I've mostly been folding tesselations, so your videos have been an amazing resource.  When I saw this Turtle design,  I thought it would be a challenge to branch out into something new.  I have just finished folding the turtle in elephant hide (didn't manage the eyes, but never mind!)  I haven't done any wet folding before and was wondering if you lightly sprayed the clipped model with water or used some other method?
Thanks again for all you painstaking work.
Naomi.
Hi Naomi,
first of all, congrats on folding your Chelone!
Now, to your question. You're absolutely right, after I had secured the paper in some strategic places, I lightly sprayed the model with water. I had actually thought I was recording while I was doing it, but unfortunately I had forgotten to hit the record button. Else that would also have been included in the video. But it really was very basic - I used a travel perfume dispenser filled with water (you can see me take it out once the model is dry) and spritzed with it all over.
Best wishes and happy folding,

Thanks for the video. That the great guide for me :)
想要看教程，谢谢
This is the page with the tutorial, but it might be that the YouTube video does not load in China.

More information about text formats

Contact Ralf Konrad
Ralf gave me permission to make a video on his Star Puff Tessellation.

7-Stage Clover Folding (Shuzo Fujimoto)
Given that I plan to make a video on a 3-stage clover folding next, I decided I needed to understand the model better. And what better way than to fold a 7-stage clover folding to grasp what it's all about? And this is the result.
Paper size: 19.5cm transparent paper (approx. 7.5in)
Model size: 8.5cm x 8.5cm x 1cm (approx. 3.3in x 3.3in x 0.4in)
The formula for determining which grid to start with depending on how many stages you want to fold is as follows: 6 * (no of stages) - 2
So for a 7-stage tessellation you need a 40-division grid.
Ravi Apte previously compiled this table:
Wow !!!
Sara? Where did you find the diagrams for the 3 layered clover folding? i have looked everywhere and i cant find out how to make it. it looks really cool. mabye you could make a video? thanks.
I plan to make a video on this, if all goes well this weekend.
Thanks for the video sara it's really good like all your other ones, but where did you get the diagrams for this model, and the other two fujimoto models?
Thanks:)
I learnt this model from Ravi Apte. He had photo diagrams on his website, too, but the website disappeared quite a while ago. Recently (after I made the clover folding video) I got a copy of Oru 4, which includes diagrams to those tessellations, and some variations. Unfortunately, it's not easy to come by that publication.

hi Sara
i made the clover folding, but, how can i add more levels?
(sorry, my english is bad) (i'm mexican)
For more stages you have to start with a grid that has more divisions, and therefore more diagonal creases. [I think I might have added double as many diagonal creases than actually necessary. This happens when you experiment...]
You then collapse just like with a 3-stage clover folding. Start from the centre, then do the next iteration of squares as before. The fourth stage is slightly different, but essentially the same. I don't really want to put it in words right now (not that easy to explain), but if you give it a try you'll probably figure it out yourself. That's how I did it, too. Once you know how to fold the fourth stage, it easily generalises to as many stages as you like.
I'll make a video on how to do the 3 stage version, and might also do one on how to make more than 3 stages. It'd just be a small add-on which assumes you already know how to fold 3 stages, but might help those that don't like "fiddling until it works" too much.
Thank you so much!!!!!
this is my result: http://www.metroflog...

bye
Nice work!

I'm struggling a bit with the whole concept of the gridding. I find 16 and 64 are quite easy, but how do I go about making a 35 grid? (and for that matter, all others inbetween 16 and 64) I could be missing something really stupid, but I just don't see it yet.
Thanks!
A 40 by 40 grid is still quite doable - divide into fifths, and then each of the fifths into eights. A 35 by 35 grid is harder, because both 7ths and 5ths aren't straightforward (esp. on small sizes). In general, you can
(a) fold a bigger grid, and then cut down to the grid required, or
(b) measure the divisions that are hard to make.
I usually just try to avoid the too irregular divisions. For example, I'd avoid a 35 by 35 grid, but I'm fine with a 40 by 40 or 48 by 48 grid.
Hope this helps a bit.
Super! Thanks so much!
Does it have to have specific valley/mountain folds or could the whole precreasing be in valley/mountain folds
I really appreciate your folding videos, as they are very clear and easy to understand.  Could you please do one for folding beyond a 3-stage clover? I would like to know how to create the initial 40x40 (or more) grid and how to add on more levels.
Thank you!
what kind of paper did u use? up there it says u used transparent paper, but it looks like almost looks like foil....
I used pergamyn. It's not at all similar to foil.

Where did you learn this and the hydrangea?
I initially learned these models from photo diagrams Ravi Apte had posted. Unfortunately, his old website, which included those diagrams, doesn't exist anymore. I also "learned" how to fold one of the models in a convention workshop that Ravi lead. He introduced a different folding sequence than his photos showed, but I don't remember it. I decided back then that the method I already knew was nicer. ;)

I successfully did a 3 stage folding thanks to your video :) Now I have to find out the courage to take up the 7 (or at least 5) stage folding!
Thanks for all the wonderful videos. I have been following them for quite some time and have made hydrangea and crowding butterflies almost 2 yrs back following your videos in youtube.
Cheers,
-Priti
do those grids mean both square and diagonals folds?
The numbers apply to the horizontal/vertical grid divisions you'll want to start with, i.e. the square grid. I think I've always added all diagonal folds, although not all of them might be necessary.

I understand bisecting 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 grids, but how do you fold a 40 grid without drawing all the grid lines?  I just bought Eric Gjerde's Origami @Tessellations book and he seems to stay with 32 to 64 grids, but you must have a technique you could share?...  I can cut my 32 grid down to 28 to make the 5 stage clover but what if I want 34 or 40 grids.  Thanks!
I was so excited about my new book I didn't read further in your posting!!! You were very kind to explain the 40 grids, but i'd love to see a video showing at least a fourth stage!  You're are so very talented and are a huge inspiration to my advancing technique.  Thanks Sara!!!!
Well, I had thought about showing a 4th stage because people seem to struggle with it. Right now I fear I have other videos in mind first. However, I would like to make a small add-on video showing how to make more stages. Maybe I could speed over the parts that are already explained in the 3-stage version to make it shorter.

i did the math and 70 grid would make a 12 stage, a 77 grid would make a 13 stage, and so on!
i met to say 76 grid would make a 13 stage
does a 32 grid work for this?
You can fold 5 stages from a 32 grid. It only requires a 28 grid, so you'll have some paper left to finish the model differently.

okay so heres what my paper looks like: on colored side(front) there is 1 square then 4 squares under that with 4 strips of paper coming out inbetween the squares, and squares under the strips. on white side(back) there are 8 strips of paper(2 on left, 2 on right, 2 on top, 2 on bottom). and 4 squares under them( 1 on bottom left, 1 on bottom right, 1 on top left, 1 on top right). in the middle there are 4 triangles pointing inward. what do i do now?
Can you send me a picture, or upload it to the internet and share a link here? My email address is sara@happyfolding.com

if I want to make more stages i have just too make a bigger grid?(sorry if i make some mistakes i'm still learning
hi Sara
your youtube channel is awesome can you please send me a diagram of the pre-creased grid for a 7 stage clover folding via email
thanks
More information about text formats

Freising 2010: Claudia Maroska's Display 3
1) What is the model called?
2) Are there any instructions (CP, video, diagram) that you know of?
I checked the pictures I took again, and could indeed find a label. It says the model is called "Blütentessellation" (blossom tessellation), and that the creator is Diana Teica.
Sorry, I don't know whether there is a CP for this, and I'm guessing it's unlikely there's a video or diagrams. If you're practiced with tessellations, I believe you could find out how to fold this by only looking at the photograph.
By the way, here's a picture Claudia Maroska posted: http://picasaweb.goo...
You could try and ask your question there.

For the instructions, please check my photostream at: http://www.flickr.co...

Cheers,
Diana T.
Wow, great! I had a quick look - it's astonishingly simple to fold. I'll definitely have to give it a try, it really is a stunning piece.

More information about text formats

Open-Back Hexagon Twist (Eric Gjerde)
This model is still listed as one of the beginner's projects, but I did find it a bit more challenging than the previous ones. Also, I first folded it with transparent paper, and I didn't like the effect as much. And then there remains the question - which is back, and which is front? I prefer this side of the model, for a front view check https://www.flickr.com/photos/30755467@N04/3284221806/.
Paper: 19.5cm square of stiff paper, 115gsm
I don't know if I'm right or wrong, but this tess looks like Joel Cooper's basket weave
Joel's basket weave is actually another project in the book - this one doesn't actually follow a straight line like a proper weave. Joel introduced me to the proper weave techniques, which I believe is mentioned for his model.
I find this one easier to fold than the tightly-packed basket weave, but it has a different effect. There's many variants on this pattern and I highly suggest exploring them, it's quite a bit of fun.
If you're interested in finding out more on weaves, I also suggest looking at some of the research of Helena Verrill - she's got a lot of patterns and information online. (although some of it needs to be pulled up through a google cache or the wayback machine, as it's no longer available otherwise.)
-Eric
I think that Helena's only diagrams of tessellations are the square twist and the ziggurat twist
Please make a video on this tessellation.
PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE
Why doesn't anybody iron their tesselations? I do so with all mine (except, of course, the 3D ones) and the paper is not affected at all. This one would look better flat.
More information about text formats

Making of Handmade Kozo
by Ilan Garibi, edited by Sara Adams
A few days ago I celebrated my 46th birthday. Today I will redeem a present: a coupon to a paper workshop in a paper mill just 3 miles north of my house. as I leave my house, the morning sun is hot on my face, while the cold winter wind gently chills it.
The place, simply called Tut Neyar, was founded by Izhar and Timna, and is in their backyard. Izhar is one of the only paper makers in the west who goes through the process of paper making from start to finish: from raising the trees to making lampshades out of his handmade paper. Izhar studied in Japan 30 years ago to then establish this unique place here. And this is where I will be his apprentice for the day.
Izhar and Timna grow Paper Mulberry trees. They're called Kozo in Japanese, or Tut Neyar in Hebrew. Mulberry is mostly used for making paper, as it has long, strong and flexible fibers. Izhar has around 500 trees, produce about 220 pounds of white pulp every year, enough material to produce about 200 pounds of paper.
The trees  grow in various orchards in the area. The most unique of these is an orchard by a vineyard located in the Galil mountains. You may wonder why some of the trees are grown so far away. The answer lies with the vineyard's owner: he wants to have his wine labels made from trees that are grown in the same soil as his grapes!
The Paper Mulberry trees are grown as bushes by cutting them to the ground level every year. This allows them to grow in straight, thin branches over the course of the next year.
The first stage in making paper is to choose the right branches from the trees. There is a balance between thickness and usefulness with the branches. A thick branch brings a lot of bark. But if it is too thick, it will be woody, and will not deliver the delicate fibers we are looking for.
After cutting the branches, they are steamed in a boiler for a few hours. The steaming loosens the bark from the branch, so that we can easily peel it off. When I arrive at Tut Neyar, the branches have already been treated in this way.
And this is the moment my hands get dirty. The bark is made from 3 layers. The outermost layer is brownish, the second layer is green in color, and the final one is white (with a slight green tint).
Using a knife, we peel the green and brown layers from the white one. We will only work with the white layer, the other two are discarded. We now need to rinse the white layer in rain water, which is collected in big barrels under the roof drainpipes. Rain water is very soft, which helps whiten the final product. This process of cleaning the bark is called chiri-tori.
Now the bark has to be boiled in water and soda carbonate to remove the lignin. Lignin is the material that causes paper to get a yellow tint when exposed to oxygen  over time. Historically, instead of adding soda carbonate, the water was infused with ash for several days. After straining the water it could then be used to boil the bark in.  Nowadays, adding soda carbonate directly is much simpler and faster.
Next we will break the mixture into fibers. For this we hammer the bark to create the pulp. Both the hammer and the surface are made of wood. By hammering we can ensure that the fibers are separated from each other without being broken and shortened.
The fibers are hollow and it's hard to spread them smoothly on a surface. It's somewhat like when you throw jackstraws on the floor. But after beating the fibers, they are flattened and behave more like a bundle of wet straps. It will be much easier to make a sheet of strong paper with them.
To check whether the fibers are all separated, we take a small handful of beaten pulp and put it in a jar of water. After shaking it we then check the mixture. If it is homogenous, like a fluffy cloud caught in a glass, the fibers are ready for the next step. If not, the fibers need to be beaten a bit more.
Once the mixture is ready, it is piled into a vat. Using a hose that releases water under a high pressure the vat is then filled. It's important to ensure that we produce a homogenous mixture, which we need for the last stage.
The process up until now concentrated on dividing the bark into its tiniest segments. With that done we can now shape those segments into paper. While preparing the pulp takes hours, or even days, putting it all together to get a sheet of paper takes mere seconds. In these seconds the quality of the paper with all its properties – such as strength, thickness, and fiber direction – are set.
The screen I use is a wooden frame onto which a net is stretched. I first have to insert the screen into the vat to collect water and pulp. Next I shake the screen gently, moving forward and backward, left and right. At the same time, I try to hold the screen as horizontal as possible throughout. Once all the water has drained, I take a deep breath. A soft layer of yellowish pulp covers the net.  And I now have to turn it upside down on top of another net, which lies on a piece of felt. Flipping over the wooden frame correctly requires a lot of skill. You have to do it promptly and firmly. If you don't, ripples and bubbles of air will form, which ruins the paper. Thankfully, if that happens, you can simply recycle the pulp. Put the screen and the pulp back into the vet and give it another go. And sure enough, that's what I do on my first attempt.
My second attempt is a success. Once the mixture is more diluted, you have to make two layers for each sheet. That's already the case after my third sheet.
Finally, we need to dry the sheets of paper. First we squeeze out all the excess water with a screw press. Then we put the sheets on a flat board, so that they can dry completely in the sun.
An hour later I hold in my hands 10 sheets of cream-color handmade Kozo paper. It is time to check the quality of paper I have made. I decide to fold my Red Flower Tessellation from the paper, and I am very happy with the results.
The texture is very defined. One side is flat and smooth, because it was attached to a flat surface when it dried. The other side is rough. The fibers are clearly visible, parts of the bark are in the paper. This could be avoided by working more neatly in the chiri-tori phase, where the pulp is cleaned. As the fibers are very long and they are spread in all directions, the paper is very strong. It also has a good memory and is easy to reverse-fold.
Back-lighting the model emphasizes the fibers, which looks just fabulous! And it's a great way to finish the day. What a great experience it has been to improve my understanding of paper and how it is made - and give it a try myself.

Triangular Box (Hans-Werner Guth): Instructions
Paper used in this video: 15cm square of kami (6in)
Finished model: side length of 7.5cm (3in), depth of 2.75cm (1in), height of 3.75cm (1.5in)
oh and one more thing
Youve writen that the paper ratio for the box is a rectangle
but it is a square right?
Actually, you can fold the box from a rectangle, too. If you start with the long side lying horizontally when doing the first step (cupboard fold), then you can achieve a triangular box that's deeper than you can with a square. For example, you may want to fold an equilateral triangle box. :)
Do give it a try!

Ah thanks! first i made a deep one then i made a very long one with a huge paper and now i am keeping my waves modules in it.That also i learntt from your videos
youre awesome
This made me smile and isn't really a big deal, but whenever you say "pivot" in the video you mispronounce it as "pee-voo." The "t" is not silent, so it's pronounced "piv-it."  I just thought I would let you know; it's still a great video and thank you!
Yes, I got another comment about it on YouTube, so I'm now aware of it. You never stop learning. :)

Too true!  Unlike me, you know more than one language, so I really can't judge.  And thanks to you I learned some new origami today. :D
Thanks for  the video. I've been making tons of them in different sizes and designs ever since. :)
Dear Sara;
What a wonderful video.  It has given me the courage to try a @tessellation fold.  The discussion of geometric crease orientation and mirror imaging gave me a much better understanding of the whole process.
Are you going to do a animal model soon in your videos?And im just curious, why haven't you updated your plans.
Hey sara, great model but i still await the video on Llopio's moment of truth model...:/ any idea when youre gonna make the video?
The truth is, right now I'm struggling to even make simple videos, because I am extremely busy. Llopio's Moment of Truth will be a video that will take considerably more time, so I fear it won't happen until things have calmed down a bit and I have more time to concentrate on videos again.
Sorry, but I fear making these videos remains a hobby, not a job.

i understand...sorry for the pressure. :(
I know it's bad that I've wanted to make a video on this model for so long, but haven't managed to find the time to do so. Sometimes it's not so easy to do what you want if there are other things you need to do, and with a higher priority. I also understand it's hard for some to forget that this is something I do alongside a full time job and further projects. I didn't mean my response to sound harsh, but more clarifying.
Hope it didn't come across the wrong way,

Dont worry about it..:)...i didn't take it the wrong way..:)..anyways thanks for the info..:) good to know..:D
thanks a lot! i am off to make 25 of these for the my little girl's advent calendar this year. you're videos are really good and very easy to follow.
Sara,
I'm very impressed with your video instructions.
I'm a primary school teacher with 45 years of origami behind me but when I recently taught my class the traditional paper crane and asked them to write a procedure[instructions] for how to do it I discovered how difficult it is to be clear about what you're doing in words.
Your instructions are the clearest I've ever seen.
Thankyou !
Good directions.  I like that you avoid unnecessary creases.
Regarding the word "pivot":  It's not wrong. It's merely a French pronunciation.
Like "depot", or "Waiting for Godot", or "bon mot".
C'est tres jolie.
Hi Sara,
This is actually the second video that I watched of yours but the first one that I completed. The first one doesn't seem to be on your happy folding site. It was a moving model made with a long rectangle. Lots of pleats and when it was finished it was a circle that folded in on itself. I'm pretty sure it was you as I watched it several times.
Hi Kathryn,

was it perhaps the Kaleidoscopic Twister? http://www.happyfold...


Yes that's the one. It was before I found you web site I just found it on YouTube. I still haven't made this. Thanks.
Hola.
Muy bonito tu trabajo. Te felicito.
Quisiera saber las medidas del papel que utilizaste ya que dice que no es un cuadrado.
Espero pronta respuesta.
Saludos.
Sandra.
Paper used in this video: 15cm square of kami (6in)
Finished model: side length of 7.5cm (3in), depth of 2.75cm (1in), height of 3.75cm (1.5in)
This is so totally awesome!  I couldn't follow the Facebook fold diagram... Thank you so much for this!!!
More information about text formats

Update and Giveaway (deadline Jan 31st 2013)
Update Feb 1st 2013: Thanks so much for the tons of supportive messages. I haven't had the time to answer any yet, but have read all of them and appreciate your kind words greatly. I'll answer as I find the time, but right now time is short. Especially the last days Felix was much worse again, but he's getting better now. In any case, here are some fun stats: After removing duplicate entrants, I received: 269 YT comments, 8 YT messages, 36 comments on happyfolding, and 28 emails for the giveaway -- and randomly selected 1 winner: Balloo17mai
More info on the book: happyfolding.com/book-terry-licence_to_fold
How to participate in the giveaway:

Do one of the following before or on January 31st 2013:
Again, sorry for not being able to upload a new origami video instruction this month. Thank you for your understanding!
Hi Sarah!
Don't feel blue about not doing a video this month! You are accomplishing amazing things. Getting your PHD, and being a Mom, everything else is far behind in importance.
Having said that, I'd love a copy of Nicholas Terry's License to Fold! Fold when you can!
Have a great day,
Veronica S.
Hello.
Looking forward to seeing your future videos.
Regards
Chaker
Please enter me in the drawing! thank you very much, i love your videos!!
I would like to enter to your giveaway!!! I'm Claor10 on youtube :)
I would love to take part in your giveaway!
Thank You
Hi! I'd like to take part in your giveaway. Your models are so great!
Please enter me into the contest :)
Hello I would like to be entered for the giveaway!
I'd love to enter your giveaway!
I really love your videos and so appreciate you posting them.  Some models really can't be explained well in a diagram or book, so your videos fill a big gap.  I particularly find your videos helpful for tessellations.  If you are taking suggestions, I'd love to see more @tessellation videos!  Thanks!
I would like to take part in the giveaway.
Dear Sarah,
I love your videos. They are very clear and easy to follow. I love them.
I admire your dedication to everything that you do. I thought I did a lot but you beat me hands down. Never do I want to hear anyone say that they have no time. I shall point them to this video to show them that if you want something you can do it.
Take care,
Valentina
I would love to enter the giveaway. I'm so happy that I've entered one of your giveaway. This is my first time.
Totally support your priorities Sara.  Keep working on the dissertation, and enjoying your time before work with Felix!  And glad to hear that you're both over your cold/flu.
al
I have found things I need to do tend to overwhelm things I enjoy doing from time to time. Sometimes I need to put aside cherished activities and pursuits for years before I can get back to them. I have always given myself full permission to do this without any regret whenever needed. Life is long, avoid regrets.
Getting your degree and attending to Felix are both full-time challenges. Stay healthy and happy, and know there is no need to apologize. For every origami breadcrumb that falls our way we thank you, but just do what is convenient. Maybe change the goal to two video's a year, maybe just put videos on hold for a while.
It's all about balance, as I'm certain you realize. Life is long. Happiness is precious. Savor life.
steve
I have a suggestion for one of the future giveaways. How about a model folded by you? Anything you felt was particularly interesting in the design or execution. Just a thought.
Sincere thanks for your contributions to the origami community.
I would like to take part in the giveaway.
Hello!
I love your videos because it's very good explain every model. :)
Also I would love to enter to your giveaway.
Thank you!
Please enter me in License to Fold give away.
Looked a little dangerous having Felix waving around the pen point.
Good luck on your Phd.
Motherhood- work- phd? Talk about burning it at both ends. Rock on Sara and Felix!
Hi Sarah!
Please count me in for the giveaway!
Just found your site! Delightful! I think your pursuing a PHD is admirable, good luck!
Hi Sarah!
I know how hard it is to make a PHD with children at home, so I wish you the best to finish it the best way you can. Take your time for your little family and stay healthy and as little distressed as possible!
We are looking forward to the next videos you will make public, no matter when it will be!
Greetings Eva
thanks about this giveaway i'm really want this book !!!
Hi Sara,
Please enter me in your January giveaway.  Love your work!  Admire your commitment.
I love your videos (not only the ones with origami) and would of course be very happy to be chosen.. :))
You have nothing to apologize for!  Your priorities are paramount and I totally support you.  I think you and all of your accomplishments are amazing.  Thank you for a wonderful site.
Best wished to you and your family
Congrats on finishing your Phd.  That is awesome!  I love your site and your videos...there's plenty for me to explore while you are working hard with school, family, and everything else.  Take care.
Hi Sara,
Thanks for the chance to win the giveaway.
I really want this book and would be so nice to have it on my shelf (of course i will fold things from it, definitely).
I like all your instructional videos :)
Hello Sara.
I am sure I am not the only one who has missed you and your amazing videos but fully understand that you have other, more important, matters to attend to. Good luck with all your future endeavours.
Very best wishes
Kathleen.
Looking forward to your next video, whenever that may be. Please enter me in this month's drawing. Thank you !
Hey Sara!
I like your videos a lot but don´t worry if you can not make them that often as you would like. We must prioritize things and family is very important, especially that little Felix. I wish you strength and happyness!
Thank you for all these videos you have allready done.
Jane
Hi!Please enter me in the contest!BTW your models are great and Happy Folding!
good luck with finishing your PhD!
you have your hands full with your beautiful boy!
Cheers,
Derek
Hi Sara,
I'm totally in. Ive kept checking out your chanel, but no knew vids. Glad you made a new one,
Kian
Hey Sara! I dont care if you dont upload for quite a while. You have multiple videos to keep me busy. You are also very busy and have your own problems to deal with (like felix being sick). I would love to take part in the giveaway as well! Id love that book. Thank you so much for doing everything you do.
Hi Sarah
It's Amazing to have a family & successful career work God bless you and your kid
i Hope i can win i am in a really bad need for that book
Excellent work so far, you shouldn´t feel about not uploading videos that often!
Thank you so much for everything you have thought me so far! I wish you the best of lucks with your kiddo and with the PhD!
Regards!
Antonio
Hello Mrs Sara Adams,
Glad to learn I have been chosen at random to be the winner of the giveaway ...
But what is to happen now ? Should I do something ?
Bye
Chris
Hi there,
it seems you didn't receive my YouTube message:
"Hey there,
this is just to let you know you're the lucky winner in my January giveaway! Can you please send me your full address, so that I can send "Licence to Fold" your way? I'll wait one week and if I haven't heard back by then I'll select a different winner. But I'm guessing you'll answer faster than that, right? :)
If you're under 18 years old: please remember to check with your parents first whether you're allowed to send your address to me.
All the best and happy folding,
"
So, can you please send me your full name and postal address? You can either send it on YouTube, or to sara@happyfolding.com - as soon as I have that data I'll post the book and that's it. :)

Hello Mrs Adams,
I'll use your sara@happyfolding.com address.
Thanks for your message.
Baloo17mai
Hello there, I wish the better for you and your family !!
More information about text formats

Unryu Paper Review
Unryu is absolutely beautiful paper, there is no doubt about it. It has long fibers that swim majestically in all directions, a huge palette of colors, translucent appeal, and a perfect wow-effect.
But the moment I got my package and opened it, I knew I was in trouble. Unryu is soft, seems to be too arrogant to hold a crease, or to remember it - hence totally unfit to origami - unless you treat it nicely.
There are multiple ways you can treat such soft paper to make it origami-capable. You can coat it with Methyl Cellulose or paint it with acrylic color. You can make tissue foil by gluing tissue paper, such as Unryu, to kitchen foil, or even make a foil sandwich, by gluing tissue paper to both sides of the aluminum foil. You can use another thin paper, like Onion Skin paper, and glue them together. And finally, you can fight your way through the natural stuff and work with it as it is.
Knowing all that, we realized reviewing Unryu would have to be done differently. No one buys Unryu to cut it to 30 small squares for a modular, nor would they fold a crane or a barking dog from it. So this review will be dedicated to complex and 3D animal models only, the main reason people will buy this paper. And we will test such models on Unryu after treating it in different ways.
There is a lot of confusion about its origin, and what is it made of. I worked hard to gather as much information on it as possible, and here is what I found.
Unryu is part of a family of papers, which are all made from Mulberry. The different papers get their surname depending on the type of Mulberry used, either Kozo (Broussonetia Papyrifera, the paper mulberry), Gampi (Wikstroemia Diplomorpha), or Mitsumata (Edgeworthia Chrysantha).
Unryu is Japanese for cloud dragon paper and the term is used for paper containing strands of Kozo fibre. Unryu papers are distinctively unique in their appearance and are available in many colours, textures, and thicknesses. Like all Mulberry papers, Unryu is made from the bark fibres of the Mulberry tree, and not from the inner wood or pith. Traditionally the paper is made by hand. Some Unryu varieties include shiny metallic silver threads for a shimmering effect and others have leaf inclusions for a natural addition.
We are not the only ones who worship this paper. Many crafter or paper artists have Unryu in their paper collection, to be used for Scrapbooking, Card Making, Collage, Painting, and Lamp Shades.
Since there are many producers of Unryu, we had to choose one vendor and check its merchandise. As usual, I got my Unryu from Nicolas Terry's Origami-Shop in a ten-color pack. There is no official information about it except for its origin: Thailand.
In this paper review we will present the result of most of the options of treatment we could think about. Although this is not a guide for paper treatment, we do linger on this part, just to make sure you understand how we treated the paper before we tested it. I thank Herman Mariano, our mentor in all paper treatment issues, for preparing all papers with me, and for guiding me in the process.
Texture: Beautiful. You can clearly see the long, swirling strands of Kozo, in no specific direction. Unryu is translucent in some parts, more opaque in others. I believe this paper was left to dry in the sun on a smooth surface, so the lower side is smooth and has a little shine to it. The upper part is more textured, you can actually feel the bumps of the fiber clusters.
With the model I wanted to fold in mind, I chose the green paper. It was pasted with 3M Super 77, multipurpose adhesive, applied as a spray. For the foil we used kitchen foil. First we cut a quarter out of the 60cm folded sheet. Luckily, our local brand of kitchen foil is 30cm wide, too, and we cut a strip that was about 40cm long. Spreading the papers on old newspapers outside, I sprayed both with an even coat of the 3M adhesive, and let it dry for 7 minutes (as instructed to have a strong bonding). When ready I held the green paper in the top two corners, and Herman attached the two lower corners to the foil. Then slowly I lowered the top edge while Herman smoothed the tissue with a small cloth. We tried to align the papers (since both are 30 cm in length), but we couldn't, and we used rulers to cut it to a square. The paper was ready.
The general feeling is Blahhhh. All fold lines looks rough from the inside. You cannot feel the paper while folding, just feel the foil. Every reverse-fold is a struggle. In step 24 you are asked to bring the flaps forward; for that you need to reverse relatively big flaps, which is very difficult to do. Sinking the legs in steps 30 and 37 resulted in a lot of crimps badly shaped on the foil side. With so many crimps on the foil side, I soon got lost and couldn't identify the crease lines referenced. Because of that, the last steps were done by guessing and some brute force shaping. The final result is far from satisfying. Although it is foil, I found it resisted the shaping of the head. Moreover, I get sparkles of shiny foil here and there, and the lower jaw is made from the foil side.
An afterthought I had is to make the foil just a little bit smaller then the tissue paper, so you will not have this shiny effect all over the edges of the paper.
For this preparation technique I used the red paper. I applied the 3M super 77 glue to this sheet of Unryu, as well as a sheet of Onion Skin paper. Again, I laid the papers with the glue applied to dry for seven minutes. Then I asked a helpful hand to hold the edges of the red paper, while I held it with the tip of my fingers on the bottom. I pulled it slowly downward, until the red paper touched the Onion Skin paper, and then I smeared it slowly with a hand movement from side to side, each time fastening a further two to three centimeters (1 inch). Still, at the end some snakes of squashed paper emerged and I smoothed them with a strong hand and my bone folder. Since I used a big sheet of Onion Skip (it is cheap, and I have a big stock of it), I had to cut away the surplus paper.
The folding experience was much better. The Onion Skin layer allows you to see the crease lines more clearly than on pure Unryu, and even the tissue foil. Reversing is still a pain in your fingers, yet again, it worked much better than while folding the bullfrog from tissue foil.  The general feeling of this preparation of Unryu is good. The paper has enough resistance and follows your leads. The curling part was the best - you get the feeling this paper can never be torn; you can pinch it, stretch it, shape it at will, and it will follow suit. The result is stunning, the texture is just wonderful.
Brown and white are the perfect colours for the color-change sheep by Hideo Komatsu we wanted to fold. I cut a 34cm square of the brown paper, brushed MC on one side, and lowered the white 30cm paper slowly, with the help of Herman. We let it dry for an hour, and then cut the surplus brown paper.
The paper we got is unique. You can feel how your fingernails make a real dent in the paper, and the clusters of fibers are easily felt. Our bonding procedure wasn't perfect, and sometimes the papers separated. It's very hard to see crease lines, and while trying to make a sink fold, I had to guess where the lines I had to reverse were. The paper in the legs is too thick, and the head won't stay flat, but tends to be opened to the sides. The model has a very clever way of locking both sides of the animal, and preventing the legs from spreading, but with this soft paper it has very little effect. Still, this is visually the perfect paper for this sheep, there is no doubt about it.
Making a sandwich from Unryu, foil, and another sheet of Unryu asks for accurate placing of the sheets. Although you can cut all three papers to the same size, this is not recommended. We suggest you cut the two sheets of Unryu a bit bigger than the foil. We again used the 3M 77 spray glue, so our sandwich consists of a layer of tissue paper, a layer of adhesive spray, another layer of adhesive spray (applied to the foil side), the foil itself, two more layers of glue, and the final layer of tissue paper - so all in all seven layers. You might think you will get a thick paper, but the result still feels like it's as thin as Elephant Hide.
Folding with this tissue-foil-tissue sandwich was even better than the first two folding experiences. All creases are visible, but reverse-folding is still problematic. Another problem arises when you try to make a straight line that falls on a cluster of fibers. The paper breaks on the edge of this cluster, and not where you want it. The shorter the fold line is - the bigger the problem is. The three layer paper felt really nice, but from time to time the inner layers separated, making a little mountain inside a valley fold. This is probably the result of not spreading the glue evenly enough.
The best part is shaping the panda to its rounded contours. It is done so easily, and the model just holds it perfectly. If only I had been smart enough to cut the foil to a smaller square, I would have been very happy with the result. Since I didn't, you can see the foil emerge here and there, which ruins the beautiful contrast between the black and white side of the paper.
I cut a 42cm square from the Ivory Natural shade to get a nice 40cm square for folding. I know that paper changes its proportions when soaked with liquid, so I didn't try to cut the right size before coating. I made my MC thick as a paste a day before, and applied it on the paper that rested on a glass plate. Using a wide brush I quickly covered one side, picked it up from the glass and moved it aside, to a clean area of the glass. This allowed me to clean the glass below the paper from all residue of glue. I continued to raise it gently and move it from side to side to make sure the paper would not stick to the glass. The first layer had dried after about 30 minutes, and I turned it over to coat the other side using the same procedure. An hour later everything was ready for cutting my square. Using two rulers to mark 37cm, I added a third ruler perpendicular to the other two and used a handheld rotary cutter to cut the square. A rotary cutter is much better than a knife, which can move the paper, or create a tear when you move it over the paper.
My square was perfect, judged by the first two diagonal folds. The paper is much more responsive and can be folded nicely. Reversing a fold is quite doable, you just need to go slowly. The main problem is all the creases are practically invisible. I could hardly see them on this ivory paper. For the closed sink in step 37, I pre-creased the flap in both directions, making it easier than expected. Finishing the body and finalizing the small details was like going downhill on a bike, no real effort is needed. The multi-layer steps are easy to do, and shaping, too. The final model does not need any extra treatment. It does feel a bit soft and tender, but the wings are stretched backward and stay there, and the legs can hold the model.
I colored a white sheet using Ecoline water color. The paper absorbed a lot of water color, and took more than 40 minutes to dry. When dried, I was surprised to see that the dimensions of the sheet had not changed, and that the coloring was very even. Next I added a layer of a mat water-based varnish. Starting from the center, I brushed it left and right, outward. I let it dry for an hour, and measured the size again. This time the effect was a major shrinking, the varnish coating shortened the paper by two to three millimeters!
I cut the prepared sheet down to a 22cm square, and started to fold. I immediately ran into difficulties. The long fibers were no longer flexible. They absorbed a lot of the varnish, and were now stiff and hard to fold. Reversing a simple valley to a mountain was now a major issue. The paper just refused to do so, and if not super careful, you just made another crease, rather than following the existing one. The general feeling is like folding a thin sheet of plastic. The ears, with many layers to be squashed, are doable, but you cannot perform the step precisely. Overcoming all those obstacles, by working slow and determined, I managed to finish it, and the result is good, I'd even say very good.
A thin paper asks for small models. Surprisingly, the rat was easy to fold. Although the paper hardly holds a crease, I managed to complete the rat. Shaping is almost impossible, since the paper never stays in the right posture. The final model tends to unfold itself, especially the legs.
Seeing the rat that Gadi had folded from untreated Unryu, I had to try it, too. And what a big surprise I had here. First, I managed to finish the model, and even more, it looks very nice. While holding it, the paper gives the feeling that it is not suitable for folding without treatment, but when actually folding it you discover it is responsive. Crease line are hard to see, but reversing a fold (which is done a lot in this Box Pleating model) is doable if you work slowly and search for the break in the paper. Squash-folding is a problem, because the paper can go flat anywhere, and it's hard to feel the right path, but work slowly and you can do it. The big problem came with the talons. Sinking such small parts was difficult, and I was not so happy with the result. Actually, there were no results; I just used brute force to bring the paper into place. But this may be the only real problem I encountered while folding. The final model is not firm and refuses to hold its shape, especially the head, beak and wing tips. It's hard to enforce those small flaps to stay in their place with a strong crease.
There is no verdict here. This paper is a prince and cannot be judged. It will give this unique and beautiful look to your models, and to get that you have to work hard. Pamper your paper and be rewarded.
As to preparation techniques, I would not choose the foil options. I liked the Tissue-Onion Skin sandwich, and the double MC coating. Folding it as it is was a nice experience, but just one layer of MC can prevent all its shortcomings. Double tissue should be used for color-change models. Again, I prefer it without the foil inside.
In Flickr we found 493 results, which shows how popular this paper is. Almost all models folded are intermediate to complex 3D animals. One of the few exceptions is a tessellation made by Eric Gjerde, treated with starch.
There are even more options to treat Unryu, but I do hope you got the hang of it from this review. Don't hesitate to test your ways, and share them with us.
How can we score it? Yes, it's not versatile at all, and can be used mostly for complex or 3D. But it is soooo charming, with sex appeal and you do get mesmerizing results. Choose the right treatment method for your model, and Unryu becomes highly suitable for folding.
Bottom line: enchanting!
I really enjoyed the paper review; keep up the good work
why Eric Gjerde treated the paper? how do you think he did that? These is one model in his book with this kind of paper. Any other example of tessellations using this paper?
I made Eric's five and four tessellation with MC coated Unryu paper and it worked really well.  The paper is just delicious to work with!
This paper is SOOO attractive and beautiful. The one thing that I did not quite like to hear was the fact that this paper doesnt really keep the shape and the creases itself. I just love the end part where the author is like: "But is is soooo charming, with SEX appeal...." XD lol
Can't have too much of it. I'm stiffening some with MC today so I can play with it later. I've always loved anything made with natural fibers, so folding unryu is a double pleasure. Last year I tried teaching origami. Not many people showed up, but I had one determined pupil, an old friend whose health is not good. For her "graduation" I handed her a piece of mulberry paper to fold a lotus flower. That made _me_ feel I had done something worthwhile.
As described, the untreated paper doesn't hold a crease very well. But after it works surprisingly well if you actually fold something. The only major problem I had was spotting the creases for reference points when folding, they can easily be confused with the fibers.
If you have hair spray at home: it works really well as a treatment, making the paper hold its creases better.

Asking for Permission vs Being Asked
You will know that I am a strong supporter of asking for permission when presenting other's work. In particular, I always get permission from the designer (or the copyright holder e.g. when the designer has deceased) before I make available an instructional video. I also wrote an article for TheFold, which gives some insight into how I go about asking for permission - and how you can do so, too, if you are planning similar projects: http://www.origami-u...
But you know what's even neater? Every now and then I now get contacted with the request to make a video. Well - that's not unusual if you are simply a viewer keen to see a specific model presented. But it is an absolute honor if it is the designer asking me to present one of his or her designs.
The other day Peter Engel contacted me with a preview of his upcoming book, "Origami Odyssey" and a query whether I'd be interested in promoting the book by presenting one model. This is something I've done with other books - usually me contacting the designer, though.
It's really rewarding to see such a request coming in, partly because it shows that my work is appreciated by designers - but also because it shows my idea of promoting books by presenting a model from it is seen as useful and worthwhile.
Of course, there are also other nifty things designers can do to promote their new publications. For example, Peter Engel posted a nice and funny video to announce his new book.
What an excellent idea! And while I've had the privilege of getting to see a preview of the book - and fold some models already - I'm also looking forward to the videos that will accompany the book. In particular, Peter Engel will be presenting some of the models diagrammed in his book with additional video instructions. Exciting! And fear not, I'm of course going to pick a different model to present in the upcoming instructional video, perhaps the Begonia Leaf?
And for those of you as excited as me about this upcoming book, you can preorder it here:
That's a really great honor!!!!! I can't wait for your next video! This is my proof of saying that your videos are AWESOME!!!
One more thing, you said you might do the Begonia Leaf, could you also do a video on the sun when you get the chance? I really like that model and the moon Peter Engel showed in the video.
I will be presenting one model, but I haven't decided yet which model that will be. The sun is definitely much harder to present, but it's also a model I am considering to demonstrate instead of the Begonia Leaf. We'll have to see!

Gosh, I'm in shock!
Nah, not really, I just can't find a better word to express my happiness for you. Congratulations!!
I have to return the compliment to Sara.  I approached her because her videos and her webpage are uniformly excellent and because she is so generous of spirit.  She's also a really fine folder.  I'm delighted to entrust my work to her capable hands.  Thanks, Sara!
--Peter Engel
I'm sorry for your papercut.
At about 0:43 in the video, what was the model? It looks really cool, so (just to make your choice of what model to teach harder) could you do a tuorial for it sometime in the future?
Sorry for the double-post, but I would have done the begonia leaf (I think that's the one in the video) with offset gridless square twists. Do you know if the model was created with a different approach? (I just designed a stink bug today, so I'm learning more and more about the effects of pleats.)
Neither the orchid nor the begonia leaf work with square twists.

At around 0:43 the orchid is shown. I don't think I'll make a tutorial on that model. I only want to demonstrate one model from the book, and prefer other models.

LIebe Sara,
vielen Dank für Deine Videos. Ich habe "Clover Folding " und "Waterbomb Tessellation" nach deiner Anleitung probiert (und schliesslich auch geschafft), und es hat mir sehr viel Spass gemacht. Auch die Schneeflocke würde ich gerne in Naher Zukunft probieren.
Vielen Dank, dass Du diese Videos drehst und allen Origami-Liebhabern zur Verfügung stellst.
Not bad at all fleals and gallas. Thanks.
More information about text formats

Scaled Koi (Robert Lang): Time lapse
Paper: 96cm square of Kozu, 45gsm (37.75 in)
Model: 52cm long, 37cm wide (including fins), 14cm high (20.5in by 14.5in by 5.5in)
Could you please tell me what divisions you use for the pleats? I want to fold the scaled one really bad!!
The crease pattern provided shows that the tail uses about 1.95 units, the body 4 units, and the head 2.35 units. Now to get a pleated body that fits into the ratio, you need to determine how much paper the pleats need. I folded in 1/6th, so each pleat will need an extra 1/3 of paper.
So, if you want your pleats to be 1 unit apart, you need to calculate in 1.33 units. This translates to a ratio of 1.95 units for the head, 5.33 units for the body, and 2.35 units for the head. This adds up to 9.63 units. So on my sheet the head got 23.35cm, the body 53.15cm, and the tail 19.5cm. The mountain folds for the pleats are 1.75cm apart, and the valley fold for the pleats are 3mm from the mountain folds.
Of course, you can vary your scales and you will need to update the maths accordingly.

You lost me.
So, if the scale pleats were on a grid, what would the grid density be, and which reference points would you use?
wait, scratch that. The scale pleats fill the body space on the CP, and you divide that into however many pleats you want?
For the distance between a mountain and a valley of one pleat I chose 1/3 of the distance between two mountain folds. So I suppose I worked on a square grid where every third crease is a mountain for a pleat, and on one side of that mountain fold there's a valley. The third crease I didn't actually add, because it is not necessary.
As to reference points, I added the mountain folds, and then eyeballed the valley folds - so I did not use any reference points.

WOW! 14 HOURS!?!?!? WHAO! ANYWAYS, AWESOME JOB! AND  I LOVE YOUR SMILE AND WAVY HAIR.. =DDD.. YOUR BEAUTIFUL! =DDD
Thank you so much! I have always wanted to fold the scaled koi but have never known what the distances are because the math always lost me. :-P
how many divisions did ya use? i had no idea what you said @Guidelines
The scales are on a 30 by 30 grid.
after seeing this vid i tryed the scales myself do you do cross-pleat unfold then put together to squashfold to form a square base then sink? (its easier done than said)
how did you make the scales?
I tried them on a smaller scale but I can't recreate the second kind of scales the book shows
I'll be posting a video on how to fold the scales. If all goes well this is going to happen within the next 3 months.

thanks :)
Although I'll most likely struggle with untill I know how to do them xD
can u plz make an actual video of the koi with scales
I might do a video showing how to fold the scales, one showing how to fold the koi, and maybe one explaining how to put scales on the koi. Putting all three in one video would be too much, I think.

then why don't you just make them all different videos instead of all in one video?
That's the plan.
Is using an iron as a folding bone a good idea, in the sense that you get crisper/sharper folds? What settings would be ideal if you were to use an iron?
Using the iron was faster and more thorough. I used quite soft paper, and my bone folder (and my strength) just didn't do a good enough job at actually flattening the paper and making a quite permanent crease.
If you want to use an iron, go for a low setting. I used the one that's suitable for silk.

the sub says it all
um... do you make scales like you do on 7-13 on nick robinson's hairy man ( in my opinion it looks like jack frost)
Sorry, I haven't folded Nick's hairy man yet, so I cannot say.

http://picasaweb.goo...
The scales are similar, but not the same. Namely, a small corner needs to be sunken in the tip to form the final shape of the scales.

Sara,
What patience you have!!! Beautiful, beautiful work!!!!!
WOW!WOW!It is amazing!I love this fish!
what type of paper did you use?
I used a 96cm square of Kozu, 45gsm.

oh my goodness....
Hallo Sara,
ich hab da mal eine Frage zu dem Buch von Robert J. Lang Origami Design Secrets...
Mir ist es nicht möglich, allein anhand des Buches zu lernen, wie diese Sachen gehen. Dabei falte ich seit über 20 Jahren Origamis - auch anspruchsvollere Sachen.
Erschwerend finde ich die Farbe sehr schlecht gewählt. In dem dunklen braun sehe ich die Faltungen kaum. In den Diagrammen sieht man den Unterschied zwischen den braunen und den schwarzen Linien fast nicht.
Ich frage mich langsam, ob es überhaupt möglich ist, nur mit dem Buch zu lernen wie das geht... Wie hast du das geschafft? Hast du Kurse besucht?
Viele Grüße von Billi
Hallo Billi,
Ich versuche mal Dir zu antworten, aber das ist natürlich alles sehr subjektiv.
> Hast Du etwas von dem Buch gelernt?
Definitiv! Ich denke die Diagramme sind ziemlich gut, aber die erklärenden Kapitel sind die eigentlichen Schätze für mich. Das heißt nicht, dass ich das lese und sofort verstehe was das genau bedeutet. Ich glaube, das darf man von sich - und vom Autor - nicht bei einem solchen Thema verlangen. Als ich den Koi gefaltet habe, habe ich mich länger mit den Schuppen auseinandergesetzt, und ziemlich viel rumgerechnet um dann die Platzierung der Schuppen richtig hinzubekommen. Dabei hilft sicherlich, dass ich Mathe studiert habe und ich solches Rumgetüftel ganz gerne mache. :)
> Hast Du Kurse besucht?
Ich habe Origami hauptsächlich durch das Lesen von Diagrammen gelernt. Allerdings habe ich von Anfang an auch mit anderen gefaltet. Als ich mit Origami anfing, habe ich auch sofort an Falttreffen der Oxford Origami Society teilgenommen. Auch wenn es nur hier und da eine Stunde war, ich habe mir sicherlich kleine und große Tricks von den anderen abgeschaut. Nun, ich habe schnell aufgeholt und dann dort angefangen selbst Modelle zu unterrichten - und das hat mich viel gelehrt. Um ein Modell zu unterrichten braucht man ein ganz anderes Verständnis und man fängt an Modelle anders zu betrachten. Zumindest war und ist es bei mir so.
Ansonsten war ich mittlerweile auch auf 5 Origami Conventions und da unterrichte ich zwar auch, aber besuche auch gerne Workshops. Vor allem aber hilft es anderen Faltern zuzusehen oder sich von ihnen etwas erklären zu lassen - in ganz informellem Rahmen. Wir veranstalten auch immer wieder kleine Falttreffen unter Freunden und da guckt man auch immer wieder wie die das so machen oder welche schönen Modelle sie kürzlich entdeckt haben.
Grundsätzlich lautet die Antwort also: ich weiß nicht ob ich groß Kurse besucht habe, aber ich habe definitiv auch viel von anderen gelernt.

Liebe Sara,
ich danke dir sehr herzlich, dass du dir Zeit für eine so ausführliche Antwort genommen hast!
Ich denke, ich gebe es jetzt auf mit diesem Buch – es ist wirklich fantastisch, aber weder mein mathematisches Verständnis noch mein Englisch sind gut genug um diese Sachen hinzubekommen. Nichts desto trotz habe ich ein paar grundsätzliche Dinge daraus gelernt. Sind die Insektenbücher von R.J. Lang einfacher?
Leider hatte ich noch nie Gelegenheit mit anderen gemeinsam zu falten...habe noch niemanden hier  gefunden, bei dem ich mir was abschauen könnte. Was ich kann habe ich aus Büchern gelernt. Aber ich komme mir wie eine blutige Anfängerin vor, wenn ich über diesem Buch brüte :)
Da ich aber trotzdem unbedingt so einen dicken Fisch haben möchte, werde ich wohl warten, bis du dazu kommst, die Videos zu drehen. Da freue ich mich drauf!
Was ist denn das für ein kleines grünes Ding, das du in dem Video immer mal in die Hand nimmst? Ein Modell?
Auch dein Weihnachtsbaum ist bildhübsch!!! Den müsste ich wohl hin bekommen :)
Also nochmal Danke! Ich bewundere dein Können!
Viele Grüße
Billi
Das kleine Grüne Ding ist glaube ich ein 15cm-Quadrat, auf dem ich zur Referenz ein paar Schuppen gefaltet hatte. Ich habe es als Referenz benutzt um sicherzustellen, dass ich die Falten richtig lege. Ich habe ja alles in einem Schub gemacht, und wenn ich einen Fehler mache - nun, dann muss ich den an ganz vielen Stellen korrigieren. Das wollte ich verständlicherweise vermeiden. :)

..jetzt habe ich die Original-Methode, die im Flickr-Link beschrieben ist, auch kapiert.
Vorteil:
1) sie braucht wesentlich weniger Papier
(Meine Methode braucht 3x soviel Papier wie Fläche am Schluss rauskommt)
2) Sie geht relativ schnell
(Mit meiner Methode würde man für 900 Schuppen sicher mehrere Jahre brauchen)
3) Die Schuppen sträuben sich nicht, wenn der Koi dann gekrümmt wird.
Vorteil meiner Methode: es werden richtige Schuppen, die sich nach hinten lösen können.
Nachteil meiner Methode:
1) für 900 Schuppen braucht man Jahre
2) Sie ist unter einer bestimmten Grösse kaum machbar
3) Sie braucht wahnsinnig viel papier.
Hallo Sara,

mein erster Kommentar vom 11. August ist anscheinend nicht durchgekommen, und deshalb wirkt der zweite so alleine wahrscheinlich etwas komisch.

Zuerst möchte ich mich bedanken, für deine zahlreichen Tutorials und Origami-Tipps. Ich habe schon viele schöne Sachen von Dir gelernt, z.b. Clove Tessellation, Waterbomb Tessellation, Hydrangea...

Nun wollte ich auch den Koi-Schuppen auf die Spur kommen, und anscheinend gibt es da grundsätzlich zwei verschiedene Ansätze:

- "Drachen-Schuppen" nach Ryujin, (Kommentar vom 11. September nennt sie "hairy-Man-Schuppen"), bei denen man dann einzeln die Spitzen versenkt (& die Keile der darunter liegenden Schicht nach hinten klappt)

- http://www.flickr.co...
oder diese Methode, bei der jeweils nur 1/6 der Länge und Breite überlappt.

Die zweite Methode geht wahrscheinlich wesentlich schneller. Ausserdem braucht sie weniger Papier (nur 1/3 Überlappung, statt 3x Überlappung).

Bei der ersten Methode kann man wahrscheinlich kleinere Schuppen machen, so wie ich das jetzt sehe.

Welche Methode ist nurn "die Richtige" für diesen berühmten Koi?
The video was indeed helpful for my research work. I had all my theory work ready to be presented but all I needed at the end was a demonstration video to give it a complete look. Thanks a lot for the share.
For the scales, did you use a 20x20 array of pleats, or 30x30? Also, after you release the trapped paper, when you spread-squash the point, did you just estimate how far to spread it, or did you pre-crease the squares?
-Griffin,
11 year old
More information about text formats

