New masks on Etsy
Hieronymus
Hierophant

Khan

Triton
The new masks are stunning!
It’s been a year… are you ok?

Enameled origami masks
I’ve got a bunch of origami masks available on Etsy
Some are older designs and some new but all feature finishes with enamels that create some interesting surfaces. It is almost impossible to capture the effects in photographs unfortunately since the iridescent glazes change in different lighting and angles.
How do you get the iridescence and would it be possible to paint the paper then fold it?
The iridescence comes from the paint used. There are a lot of choices to get that effect. I can’t paint the paper before folding with the enamel paints because the enamel sets up rigid and cannot be manipulated after it is set. You can paint the paper with some paints before folding as long as the paint doesn’t crack or rub off as you work the paper. Some acrylic paints will work, but the best bet is to use watercolor paints, inks or dyes.
Ok, thanks for your help!
Are you alive? We miss you!
I agree, this silence is make me missing of the news from Joel’s Art. (I’m Fan of Joels’s Mask Style)

New masks
Just posted some new masks on Etsy, featuring new variations on warrior faces with crested Hellenic helmets, corrugations and curlicue beards.
these are incredible!
I’m curious… I saw the latest Flickr photos, and I noticed that those masks were not quite so glossy, and they looked more like pottery than metal. Do you prefer your masks to look more like metal, clay, or something else that I have not seen yet?

New masks and new techniques
I’m always looking for new ways to finish my origami. Lately I’ve been playing around with some solvent-based paints which I’ve used to create effects that make the paper look more like glazed ceramic.
I’ve never worked with these type of enamel paints before and I’ve gone through a lot of trial and error (mostly error) to figure out how I can use them to their best effect. I’ve had at least three that I think worked pretty well, and they are available for sale on my Etsy site

They’re variations on some previous designs but what makes them each unique is the quality of the surface, which is unlike anything I’ve done before. The translucent enamels give them a depth which I find really appealing.
Just a thought Aethelred looks a little like his nose is broken in that photo.
Could you do a tutorial on how to make a corrugation and lock it with a regular tessellation? I have been trying to do something like that but it just falls apart every time. 😛
Another good(?) idea might be to make plaster casts of some of your masks so that you can paint them. Don’t know if you like that idea, but I think it would be cool.
Stunning.  Everything you do is simply stunning!

Origami House – Colonia, Uruguay

The Origami House is a new museum of origami in the works in historic  Colonia del Sacramento in southern Uruguay, just across the mouth of the Rio de la Plata from Buenos Aires. Maybe not the first place you’d think of when you think of origami, but a more beautiful site you would be hard pressed to find. And besides, Japan already has an origami museum; Spain has the EMOZ , Escuela Museo Origami Zaragoza – but this may be the first museum in the Americas dedicated solely to paperfolding.
The fledgling endeavor has an Indiegogo account set up to accept donations to help it get off the ground. Money will go towards pedestals, displays, etc. as well as the modifications necessary to make the existing structure appropriately climate-controlled for the display of origami. Many of the participants of the recent Folding Paper travelling exhibition (myself included) have donated their pieces from the show to reside in the new museum. Some of the money donated will go toward shipping costs to get these artworks to the new site.
Not just a gallery, the Origami House will be a genuine museum with collections of books, artifacts and documents related to the history of origami in addition to displaying examples of paper-folding from around the world.
My name is Rodger Despres. My hobby is building paper model trains.They are structurally designed and made without glue. I would like to find a home for them. Please send me an email address so that I can send pictures to you.
Thank you

New masks and not so new masks
I’ve got some new masks available for sale in my Etsy shop. There are three that have just returned from the Masqalors show in Quebec (those would be the aforementioned “not so new masks” although they are only a little more worldly for their recent trip across the border). You may also find three new variations that I’ve been working in the last month or two. The new masks feature techniques of “origami corrugation” to create interesting decorative patterns.
I’ve used a band of corrugation as a decorative motif across the top of this mask as well as the Charlemagne mask above.
This is something new to me but a technique that has been well employed by other folders like Ray Schamp and Andrea Russo and many others. I’ve only incorporated small areas of corrugation as flourishes, but found the approach both rewarding and surprisingly tricky. Ben Parker has had more practice combining corrugation and traditional @tessellation than I, and he makes it look easy.
I love the corrugated crowns! V.N.D.: Very Nicely Done!
Also, could you post a tutorial on how to keep the tension in a corrugation like this? I mean not a tutorial for a mask, just a corrugation “sample” (like a carpet sample :).
I concur!
It is nice!
I have nominated you for an award because your work is nothing short of amazing: https://jubilare.wordpress.com/2015/10/19/creative-blogger-award/
I want everyone who reads my blog to see what you do.
I just read a comment on your Etsy page, and it occurred to me that you should make portraits of famous painted portraits like the Mona Lisa or, as a challenge, Picasso’s Self Portrait. Just a suggestion, but I think that that would look really neat.
Happy Thanksgiving to you! (I know it’s a day late, but I was rather busy with the holiday)
Hey Joel, I have been trying to make a mask like these but i cannot figure out how to do the mouth. Is there anything you can tell me to help me?

Masq’alors!

If you happen to be around Saint-Camille, Quebec, next week drop by the biennial Masq’alors! festival. It’s a festival of masks going on from May 28 through June 7.

Traditional masks, exotic masks,

fantastical masks, theatrical masks and even a few origami masks.
If you have an opportunity, don’t miss it!
The festival is an event started by the Productions des paysages éclatés, a group of creative people dedicated to promoting and celebrating artistic expression and culture in everyday life through events like Masq’alors! (the exclamation point is mandatory) as well as workshops for all ages.
Hi Joel, what is your email? I am looking for a paper artist to hire for a project but cannot find your contact info! Thanks!
You can contact me through my Etsy shop or Flickr, but I must tell you I don’t do commissions and I already have a full-time job so I’m not really for hire for anything.

Suncatcher @tessellations
I’ve been working on something new lately. These are small origami tessellations, 10-12 cm. wide, folded from hexagons of simple bond-weight colored paper. The difference is in the finishing. After they’re folded, I saturate the paper with a one to one mix of melted beeswax and damar resin. This is a traditional basis for encaustic painting, but without pigments it makes the  the paper translucent. The mix also makes the origami rigid and durable. The beeswax keeps the object from becoming too brittle and the damar resin raises the melting point of the wax so the suncatcher doesn’t go soft in the sun. I’ve created a new section in my Etsy shop, as well as an album in my Flickr photostream where you can see many more designs.
So do you do encaustic art as well as origami?

New masks on Etsy
I’ve spent most of the last month working out the kinks in a particular new mask design. Once I get an idea in my head I tend go over it again and again until I’m either satisfied I’ve found the best solution or I’ve at least exhausted all the possibilities I can think of. That usually means a slew of masks representing variations on the same theme, so that I can see which ideas work and which do not.
The latest idea has been rather fruitful, and so far I’ve made three variations that I think came out pretty well:
Constantine
Neptune
and Triton
They are all based on the same design, the most obvious difference is that Neptune and Triton have beards and Constantine does not. I wanted to design a mask that could go either way, so to speak. The eyes and nose of all three are essentially the same and the headdresses have only minor differences.
I’ve still got some more ideas to work out with this design you may see more in this line soon.
The fourth mask is a bit of a break:
Helios
This is a design from last year that I wished to develop a little further, and something with a slightly more pleasant expression. Those other three seem a bit cranky for some reason. I don’t know why so many of my masks come out like that, it’s not like I’m trying to make them all look angry.
Love your pieces.  I was to slow on the draw and missed out on the long beards.  Perhaps I will be quicker next time.  Keep me on your list to follow.  Your work is terrific!
I think you should post tutorials on your masks o_O……
Dear Joel
If you ever make another Helios, I would love to buy it.  Do you take commissions?  If so, please let me know how much and where to send the money.  I have been after one of your artworks for ages but the three currently on your site are a little too masculine for my taste.

Folding a flagstone tessellation
A tessellation is a pattern of repeating geometric forms that can interlock to fill a space infinitely. In origami tessellation, a discrete unit of folded shapes that can be repeated to make a tessellation is sometimes called a “molecule”.
This molecule is an example of a style of tessellations I started folding almost a decade ago that I took to calling “flagstones”. Combining shapes like rhombus twists and open backed hex twists on the front with triangle and closed hex twists in the back allows the shapes in front to sit right next to each other with only a sort of “grout line” separating them. It reminds me of tiles or paving stones, hence the name.
I’ve made a video of folding a star and hex molecule, consisting of a cluster of rhombus twists in a star formation surrounded by hexagonal twists. This unit can be reiterated to fill as much space as the piece of paper will allow.

Your stuff is off the hook, bro. One day, I shall fly you out to Rhode Island for a week-long origami teaching session where you show me that style, lol. Them masks are bananas. Them lips! By Neptune’s beard, how the heck did you get them to look like how they look like in the comic books? Lol good stuff man.
Pingback: Hexagon Flagstone Tessellation (Joel Cooper) – Funny Origami

New mask on Etsy
Iron Aelfred

Finishing a mask (pt. 2)
Last week I made a post documenting folding a mask. A few days ago I posted about part of the finishing process. Today I wrap it up with the final steps of finishing.
By the end of last post, the mask looked like this:
Shiny bronze. I could have stopped here and called it good, but I really wanted a nice, crunchy verdigris patina on this thing to give it some character. I have a technique I’ve been experimenting with to create an effect of age, oxidation, rust or corrosion.
I apply a layer of crackling (or “craquelure” if you want to sound fancy) with a mix of pigments and Kroma Crackle as a medium. I first found out about Kroma Crackle from Joseph Wu’s use of it on his own origami, as you can see here. When I saw what he was doing, I had to try it for myself. There are a  lot of crackling glazes out there, but they are usually glossy and work best on hard non-porous surfaces. Kroma Crackle has more of a matte finish and is flexible, not brittle, when it dries.
To prepare my verdigris I will assemble my materials.
Most of the pigment will be in powder form. In the jar is powdered glauconite, a mineral traditionally used to create blue-green paints. I happened to have some around from years ago when I used to play at making my own paints (but that’s another story). If you’re interested in such things, you can find Rublev natural pigments and other traditional artists’ supplies at NaturalPigments.com.
I also have Micaceous Iron Oxide again, some Phthalo Green and Manganese Blue, and of course the tube of Kroma Crackle.
First I mix up a little of the liquid paints – MIO, Green and Blue in roughly equal measures.
Then mix in the glauconite to make a thick mud. Add a little water if necessary, but I only want enough liquid to disperse the particles of glauconite so that it will mix with the Kroma Crackle more easily and without clumps.


When the pigments are thoroughly incorporated in the crackle medium, I use a broad brush to slather the mixture onto the mask.I want to make sure to get it into all the crevices. After I’ve coated the whole surface evenly I can continue to go over the surface to brush some of the glaze away from the high points so that the bronze underpainting will show through.

The crackle glaze takes a long time to dry, but I can accelerate it a bit with a hot air gun. Getting the drying started will at least keep the goo from dripping of the mask before it is dry.

When it dries, it will lighten in color and become opaque. Added a final coat of shellac will make the crackle somewhat more transparent where it is thinnest, so the bronze can come through more. But I have to wait until the crackle is absolutely, completely dry, through and through before I can apply the shellac. That will take no less than 24 hours. Usually it is best to wait a couple of days at least.
When it is dry, I get out the clear shellac, thinned at with at least 50% alcohol. The crackle glaze drinks up the shellac so I make it very thin and apply it generously. The crackle becomes very transparent when it first absorbs the shellac, but it will become more opaque as it dries.
When the shellac has been applied, the surface looks blotchy but that will even out as the shellac cures.And finally, the finished mask.
All told, it took about a week to complete this piece but a lot of time is spent waiting for something or another to dry before going to the next step. Usually I have more than one project going on so I always have something to work on.

Finishing a mask (pt. 1)
The mask looked like this by the end of the last post.
It took a lot of work to get here, but we’re not done yet. This ephemeral piece of paper needs to acquire more permanance.

First I glue a piece of wooden skewer to the back.
This will help hold the shape as well as provide a means to hang the piece for display.
Then comes the first shellacking. There are fancy shellacs that you get from the art supply shop, but I have found that the stuff you get from the hardware store works just fine. I cut it 50/50 with denatured alcohol to get a thin consistency. The shellac needs to soak into the paper, not sit on top.

I have a long, stiff-bristled round brush that I use exclusively for shellacking. It can get under creases and in tight spaces and the long bristles hold a good amount of shellac.
I work on the back first, trying to get  shellac into the paper as quickly and evenly as possible.
You can see the paper looks blotchy from some unevenness of saturation. I thin the shellac out with a bit more alcohol and work on the front of the mask to get into places I couldn’t soak from the back.
I’ll have to wait a while for the shellac to dry – a few hours at least but preferably 24 – before I can begin painting. Water is the enemy of shellac. You cannot shellac the paper if it the slightest bit damp or the shellac will get gummy and not cure properly. You also don’t want to start applying water-based paint (which is what I’ll be using) until the shellac is completely dry.
I’ve decided to go with a bronze look for this piece. There are a lot of faux-bronze finishes you can find at craft stores (and I will use some of them, but for highlighting only). I find that many of them have a flat, cheap or unconvinvingly glittery appearance. Especially when creating an old metal effect, I prefer to use layers of color and texture, with just a highlight of metallic paint and the final shellacking to provide the gleam of metal.
Having said that, I will start with a metallic bronze paint and micaceous iron oxide for the underpainting. The colors will be obscured by later layers however – what I want is a dark layer with a bit of shimmer underneath to give the surface some depth.
I’ve watered down the bronze and iron paints to make a wash and I’m using a broad, soft bristled brush to lay it on quickly. The Golden brand Micaceous Iron Oxide, by the way, has been a great addition to my palette. It is an unassuming charcoal gray color but it is infused with coarse mica so it provides texture as well as sparkle. By itself it has the appearance of cast iron.

The piece is completely covered. The very wet paint is causing the creases to loosen and begin to unfold, especially in the beard.
While stil wet, I begin setting the stage for the bronze color.
This will be a mix of Burnt Sienna and Alizarin Crimson.
These colors are a part of any artist’s palette so they are not difficult to find. I’m using Golden brand again but you can use any kind you prefer.
This layer is also painted thin so that the dark color can wash into all the nooks and crannies.
The beard has almost completely unfolded from all the wet paint. The previous shellacking keeps it from coming apart entirely so any part of the mask that has come undone can be pushed back into shape when the paint has dried.

The Sienna and Crimson layer is dry and the mask has been reshaped. The mask has become much stronger after shellacking, wetting, re-molding and drying, and will be able to hold up to the rest of the painting without coming apart.
The underpainting is done, so now I’m preparing the primary color. I use Burnt Sienna again as the base color, lightened up with a little yellow (I’m using Arylide Yellow because it is less bright than the other yellows I have) and tinted with Yellow Iron Oxide and Quinacridone Nickel Azo Gold.

Burnt Sienna is the most opaque paint in this mix, so it will be the base color. It needs to be lighter and more “orangey” to look like bronze, so the Arylide Yellow (I think it’s the same as Hansa Yellow, for what it’s worth). Yellow Ochre would have been my first choice since the Arylide is a little too transparent to hold it’s own against a dark background, but I couldn’t find my ochre. The Yellow Iron Oxide and Quinacridone Nickel Azo Gold (which I’ll refer to as QNAG so I don’t have to type that whole thing out each time) are the most transparent and act more like a stain.
As I paint, I change the proportions of the paints. I start working with mostly Sienna and Yellow to get a baseline color and when most of the mask is covered and the paint is still wet, I add increasing amounts of Iron Oxide and QNAG to tint the color to the right hue. When I’m just about finished and the mix is mostly the transparent colors, I add a little irridescent gold. This is another transparent paint that doesn’t effect the color much, but it does give the whole a metallic sheen.
Then I wait some more. I will be doing some dry-brushing to finish up the painting, so the background will have to be dry.
I use a metallic gold paste (marketed as a “dabber”, it comes with a sponge applicator but I use my brush instead). Any metallic paint would do as long as it’s not too thin or transparent. I’ve added some QNAG to get a coppery color.
I get a little bit on a short, firm bristled brush and blot the excess off on a paper towel. Then I brush very lightly just over the highlights. I don’t want to overdo it.
Then when everything is dry, I can seal it all with another coat of shellac. This time I’m using amber shellac (It usually comes in clear and amber. I’ve used clear so far since I only wanted to preserve the paper without changing the color). I’ve added a couple drops of red and green alcohol dyes to darken the shellac even more from an amber color to a sepia/brown.

And now it’s bronze. And it could be done, were I the sort to leave well enough alone.
But what I really want is old bronze. Bronze that might have been exposed to the elements for centuries or dredged from the bottom of the ocean. So in my next post I will show how I make  a faux-bronze patina. It took several hours to get to this point, and I’ll end up covering up a lot of what I’ve just done. Every mask is different and I learn something new each time, so nothing is really wasted.
A few observations about the process so far:
I really could have used some yellow ochre.
The QNAG was more useful than I thought it would be. It has a nice rusty orange/gold stain to it. I found that it makes a good transparent glaze over a metallic base.
The Yellow Iron Oxide didn’t do much at all. It couldn’t compete with the darker colors. It would probably work better mixing with lighter colors.
I think the bronze paint in the first layer of underpainting was unneccesary too. The Micaceous Iron Oxide set the groundwork with texture and shine and the Burnt Sienna and Alizarin Crimson that came next laid the foundation for the color.
I don’t usually do product endorsements – I certainly don’t get paid to do it, and I think you should just use whatever works for you anyway – but I can’t say enough about Golden paints. I’ve used a lot of paints over the years, from high priced “Fine Arts” paints to cheapo poster paints. Golden, which sort of straddles the unspoken line between “Fine Art” and “Craft” supplies, is one of the best paints I’ve used. Their selection is remarkable. The QNAG, which I admit I only purchased because I had never heard of it before and was intrigued by the name, has actually proven to be one of the more useful paints in my arsenal. They have a variety “novelty” paints like irridescents and interference paints which are consistantly high quality.

Wow, another amazing job!
Pingback: Finishing a mask (pt. 2) | origamijoel

Folding a mask
I had in mind to do another large bearded mask, based on the “Goderic” design around the nose and mouth and the beard itself, but with a different structure for the eyes and top of the head.
This basic design has been through many permutations, but most of the variations had been in the layout of the beard. I wished to attack this model from another direction. I thought the piece “Spirit” had enough points of similarity around the area of the eyes and upper cheeks that I might manage to graft the top of one design to the bottom of the other.


It wouldn’t necessarily be a clean graft, since there are still many points of divergence that will need to be reconciled, but I wanted to give it a shot. I’ve taken some pictures at various steps of the process.
The first step is the paper. This is a big mask – 96 pleats in width. I want the pleats to be at least 4.5 cm. wide so I’ve begun with a piece of elephant hide paper 45 cm. across. To get 96 pleats, you first divide the paper in thirds longitudinally, and then begin dividing the divisions in half again and again, accordion fold style (3 parts divided by 2 equal 6 parts, divided by 2 equals 12 parts, then 24 parts, 48 parts, 96 parts).
The red mess is a prototype for the Goderic design that I will be using as a guide for most of the folding. It’s been folded and unfolded several times to try out different combinations of creases which is why it looks so rough, but there is enough information in this piece to help me with my new design.
I start at the top, working as if I were folding the “Spirit” model. I don’t have a working model for that design like I do for Goderic, so I’m using pictures as a guide.
A closer view – you can kind of see that I’ve worked down as far as the tops of the eyes here.
The trick to stitching parts of two different designs together is to identify which elements must be done a certain way, and which can be modified. Then you start with the bits that have to be done exactly, and sort of “fill in the blanks” around them.
The eyes from Spirit and the nose from Goderic both have very definite structures. The cheeks of both have more flexibility in how they can be done. So I need to fold the eyes and the nose first and then try to fill in the other areas. Fortunately, the base of the nose and the space between the eyes for both designs are similar, so I can segue from Spirit’s eyes to Goderic’s nose with little difficulty (The eyes are a little closer together in Spirit than in Goderic, but I can make adjustments). I fold the necessary and invariable parts first, then I will have to improvise for the cheekbones and around the outside of the eyes.
Here I’ve filled in the area of the cheek down to where the mouth will begin. I’ve been working on one side only until I figure out the design, Once I’m satisfied that it will work, I can do the same thing on the other side.
You can see here about how much of the paper I’ve worked through by this point. Unfortunately, shortly after I took this picture, I discovered that I had made a small but crucial error in folding the bottom of the nose. I had deviated by a single crease at a point above the nostril. It was a small mistake but at a point in the design that would not tolerate any deviation at all.
I was able to make the correction to the nose and redesign the cheek to compensate. Then I could proceed to fill out the mouth and jawline. You can see the beginnings of the beard as well.
I think this design will work, so I can move on to the other side of the face. This is the home stretch!
The face itself has used up less than half of the long piece of paper. The rest of it will be all beard.
Half of the beard folded and I’m wondering if the paper really needed to be quite this big. This is the monotonous part and it seems to take forever, the same folds over and over again.


Then finally the folding is done! But the work is not. You see in the upper left hand corner of this picture, a spray bottle. The next step may be the trickiest. To get the mask into proper shape I use the sprayer to moisten the paper, then manipulate the form of the mask as the paper dries. The water softens the sizing in the paper. When the paper dries, the sizing resets in the new configuration, holding the shape I give to the paper. This is the idea behind wet-folding, although wet-folding usually involves dampening the paper and then folding it, I fold the paper and then wet it. I would not be able to fold the mask at all if the paper was too soft since the technique requires a certain amount of resistance from the paper.
So I spray the paper just enough to get it damp but not sopping wet. A large mask like this I’ll do only a part of the model at a time. The paper expands and tries to unfold when it gets wet, so I have to keep at it, holding the structure together, refolding creases and molding the shape until the piece is dry again. This part requires constant and uninterrupted attention or the hours of folding I just completed will be undone. This is the result. Looks good, but I’m still not done. There will be shellacking and painting and maybe some other things to make this piece look as good as possible. So stay tuned for the next installment: Finishing a Mask, wherein I will do just that.
Thanks for sharing the process; very interesting.  It’s great to see one of your masks in progress.
Wow, that looks crazy.  It was very cool to see your process.
Thank you for sharing this Joel.  You make it sound so easy!  I’ve done some folding with elephant hide.  Marvelous paper.  But it takes a master to do what you do.  Thank you for continuing to “push the boundaries” of origami.
Pingback: Finishing a mask (pt. 1) | origamijoel
Pingback: Finishing a mask (pt. 2) | origamijoel
Dear origami god can you please put a tutorial for your origami sculpture ,face ,3face statue

Four new masks on Etsy
The last batch moved pretty fast. I can’t complain, but it sure is making it hard to keep up.
I’ve got four new masks now:
Solace
Helios
Warrior
and Spirit
Some old favorites and variations. I’ve mostly been experimenting with surfaces – transparency and textures, mixing pigments with different media to try and get interesting effects.
I’ve got more projects in the pipeline so it shouldn’t be too long before the next batch is ready to share.

Amazing work again!
hi! your masks are amazing! i was wondering whether i could draw a picture of one of them and send it in to my high school’s literary magazine? i’d give you credit for it too, of course. thanks!
Hi – I’m sorry I haven’t responded sooner, but of course you may draw a picture of any of the masks you like. Thank you for asking.

New masks at Etsy (finally)
Sylvanus:
Caliban:
and Faunus:
Sylvanus and Caliban you might recognize. They are designs that I’ve been tweaking for a while and these are the latest iterations. There will probably be more since I can’t seem to leave these designs alone. Faunus is an all new design. I’ve been working lately on some smaller models; trying to get more expression out of less paper. My models seem to have been getting bigger and bigger and more and more complicated so Faunus is an attempt to downscale a little bit.

Upcoming exhibitions
Summer is the big season for exhibitions and there are a few coming up that I have the privilege of participating in.
The first is “Surface to Structure”, an origami exhibition at the Cooper Union (no relation) in New York.
Cooper Union was the site of the first origami exhibition in the U.S. back in 1959, featuring some of the greatest origami artists of the time. The exhibition this year promises several big names in contemporary origami and some of the most beautiful origami artwork around. The show will run from June 19th to July 4th and is free and open to the public, so if you’re in New York you should definitely check it out.
I’m currently preparing work for two shows coming up in August.
The Origami Museum of Zaragoza in Spain (the first and as far as I know only museum in Europe dedicated to origami) rotates exhibitions every two months or so (They’ve just wrapped up a retrospective of Akira Yoshizawa). I’m planning on contributing a few pieces for the August exhibition.
Also in August there will be a showing at the Michael Good Gallery in Rockport, Maine. I will be sharing space with jewelry artist Sarah Doremus and sculptor Greg Pinto. This should be an interesting venue for me since it will be the first time since the local art festival more than a decade ago that my work will be shown not as part of an origami exhibition. It should be interesting to see how it is accepted alongside artwork of other media.
So for the next couple of months you won’t be seeing much in my online shop as all my efforts will be directed toward creating new work for these shows.

We expect your models in Zaragoza Origami Museum in August for the next exhibition, currently also we expose some of your old models, but we look forward to receiving your new models, thanks

Talos and Rufus on Zibbet
Two new masks available:
Talos
Rufus Redbeard
Absolutely incredible work like always.
Hi, we are organizing the Quebec International Mask Festival (www.masqalors.ca). Your origami masks are very interesting. Would you be interested in exposing at the festival?
It sounds very interesting. I’ll contact you for more information.
I am hereby challenging you to make a mask out of a square grid instead of a hexagon grid, just to make it easier for me to reverse engineer it. It probably won’t be as cool and interesting, but at least I will be able to figure out easier how to transfer those techniques to a hex grid, if you decide to take the challenge of doing such an amazing feat.
The Rules: You are NOT allowed to “cheat” (kind of) by using the Goran Konjevod method of making a mask. You are, however, allowed to invent your own tehniques. If you do accept the challenge, then PLEASE hurry!
Have a great life!
P.S.: Eric Joisel’s method is off limits, too.
I appreciate the suggestion but I find that I have enough challenges in my life right now.

Aelfred II and Daemon on Zibbet
Two new masks are now available at my Zibbet shop.
Aelfred II
and Daemon


Absolutely amazing as always, especially the Aelfred II one!
Increadible, what tessalation techinques are used

Empty shop empty no more
At least for now.
I’ve finally finished some new pieces that I can post for sale in my Zibbet shop.
Aelfred:
Naga:
and Goliath:

Naga and Goliath are two new variations based on a design that I’ve used for models like Asterius and others, a design I’ve been playing around with since 2009 (you can see the germ of it here). The design is based on a grid oriented horizontally rather than vertically, which is a surprisingly challenging.
I revisited an early design for Aelfred as well – Poseidon here from back in the day – another model I’ve always liked, but which still had some design issues I wanted to address. I like how they’ve been reconciled with Aelfred. For one thing, angry Poseidon can finally shut his mouth!


Absolutely fantastic.  How long does it take you to fold one of these?

“Shadow Tessellations” kickstarter
Ben Parker, an artist whom I’ve mentioned before, has started a kickstarter to help fund an exhibition of his new work. You can learn more about it and maybe kick in a few bucks here. At this moment he is about a third of the way to his goal.
Ben continues to push the boundaries of origami by a  sort of cross-pollination with photography. A traditional “photogram” (as opposed to a photograph) is created by placing objects on a piece of photosensitive paper and exposing the whole to light, thereby preserving an image of the objects’ shadows. Ben has eliminated the object and instead folds the photosensitive paper in a darkroom, then exposes the origami to light. The paper thereby takes a picture of itself. It’s all very existential somehow. I’ve never heard of anyone doing anything quite like this, and I kinda wish I had thought of it myself.
So even if you won’t be able to make it to Connecticut for the exhibition you can donate some money to defray the various expenses and receive a piece of original art for your very own.
You can also see more of what Ben has been up to at his Flickr site or his own website BRDParker.com.
shared your kickstarter post on FaceBook!
Please “Like” our page for more Social Media Mileage:
http://www.facebook.com/PaperConnectionInternational
Very cool, I’ll try to get the word out about this.
thepaperwoman: liked and thanks for the share!
Thanks for the post, Joel 😀
how you would come up with an idea as amazing as that i do not know, Ben Parker seems incredibly creative. Someone i must look up.

Artorius and the return of the Prophet at Zibbet
Two new masks in my Zibbet shop:
Artorius
and the Prophet
Well I had some unexpected traffic from ThisIsColossal and Laughing Squid and other websites at the same time that I decided to have a seasonal sale. Everything sold out. I did not expect that. Since there has been so much interest I wanted to have at least a couple more masks available before sale ended and although I’ve been folding like a madman lately, I have not been able to do as much as I would have liked. Nevertheless, I did manage to finish these two, and though the sale was supposed to end Monday I’ve decided to offer both at reduced prices for a little while longer.

Both of those look absolutely amazing as always!
Joel,
I had been watching for postings since I contacted you, and there it was when I was on the bus. I contacted my daughter and she took care of the purchase for me. I am so pleased and look forward to receiving the art.
Debra
How you created the beard of the prophet or pretty much any of your designs, i will never know however i love the incorporation of the hexagonal plating in so many of your designs.

Bibliomania!

Courtesy of Metafilter, I was introduced to the Special Collections and Archives at the University of Iowa’s tumblr. Go there! Click on that link! You think an archival library must be a sombre and boring place – just see for yourself. See flying squirrels! Teeny tiny books with their own teeny tiny bookstands! How about Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland as illustrated by Salvador Dali!  And so much more!

(They have lots of cool gifs and other surprises there too)
Some of those old books are incredible!  Thanks for sharing.

Magnus and Sargon at Zibbet
Two new masks for sale at my Zibbet shop –
Magnus:
and Sargon:
The sale is still in effect until January 6, 2014, so expect the prices to go up if these two are still around by then.
These masks are similar designs; brothers, so to speak, both evolving from explorations of the same design. Magnus would be the older brother – Sargon is a variation on the same theme but a bit more compact in design (specifically Magnus is based on a 96 crease grid and Sargon on an 80 crease grid, for whomever may be concerned).
Sargon is painted with raw umber and iridescent green underpainting and silver glaze on top. Magnus has a blue underpainting and is finished with metallic paints with granular mica that gives it a slightly roughened texture.
Incredible work like always!
the pieces of art that you create personally remind me alot of middle earth, Have you considered doing a rendition of sauron?

Homunculus and Asterius at Zibbet
Two new masks for sale at my Zibbet store:
Asterius and
Homunculus.
Asterius is based on a model I did some time ago that I called the “Imp”, but with some elaboration on the horns and a more flamboyant background. The flame motif and the somewhat bullish look of the face inspired me to name this one Asterius (or Asterion if you prefer), the mythical figure associated with the Cretan bull of the sun and sometimes identified as the famous Minotaur of the labyrinth.
Homunculus was a prototype with characteristics that would later find their way into several later designs. He’s kind of funny looking, but I think he’s cute. He looks more like an imp, but I already used that name so I call him a homunculus. He’s dressed up with a very nice glaze of mica infused metallic paint that gives him a pewter-like appearance.
Good grief those look fantastic!  And excellent choice of colour for that Asterius mask.
I just ran across your masks on Pinterest, and wanted to encourage you to enter them in ArtPrize in Grand Rapids, MI. There’s decent money involved and lots of exposure- your art is incredible!

SALE!
I am offering 30% off of anything in my Etsy and Zibbet stores for a limited time. Use the coupon code PAPER30 at the time of purchase at my Etsy shop and 30% will be deducted from the entire purchase. I can’t make coupons on Zibbet, but you will see the list prices there are already reduced from the usual price.
There’s still time to get a present that you can be sure they don’t already have.
The offer is good until January 6 of next year, so if the holidays come and go and you find to your dismay that nobody has given you an origami mask for Christmas, you still have time to get one for yourself.
Merry Christmas, Happy Kwanzaa, Joyous Solstice and a Fabulous Festivus for the rest of us!

Bronze Faun at Zibbet
This model is a tweak of the earlier Faunus model. I finished it with a verdigris effect which I think came out nicely.
Just posted a new mask for sale at Zibbet
Absolutely fantastic!  You have a very distinct style with these masks and each one always blows my mind!
Dear Joel
I’m a magazine editor from Taiwan, my name is Carlos. I’m prepare for an article to introduce your fancy artworks, can I have the larger photos and information about them for magazine use? I’ll send you the layout once it’s be published.
That will be really helpful, thank you.
Best regards,
Carlos Yuan
You can find images at the original resolution on my Flickr site at http://www.flickr.com/photos/origamijoel/. My profile page on Flickr also has contact information if you wish to continue this discussion privately.

Faunus on Zibbet
New mask available at my Zibbet shop:
I like the way the horns came out on this model, although it’s difficult to really see from the photograph. I used a blend of metallic paints, titanium white and raw umber to get a stony looking surface, and I think it looks a bit like the gargoyles hanging from the side of an old cathedral. In the picture it looks rather silvery, but in real life it’s a more earthy, brownish color – these masks are devilishly hard to photograph for some reason (at least for me).
really great works
Wonderful model!! I couldn’t get your level even if i practise all my life!
Hi !
I’ve looked around your website, you really do a great work. Indeed, this mask looks like some of the hidden sculptures of a cathedral, such as the old one of Reims (France), where I live. I hope that one day, I could improve my folding skills. I’m a student in Mathematics and origami is a very interesting way of dicovering geometry. I also have a website on which I display photographs of my origami costume jewel (I’m not sure of that expression, I’ve searched in a dictionary).
Thanks for sharing your love of origami !

Silvanus – new mask on Zibbet
This is the latest mask just finished in an ongoing study of bearded faces. He combines elements from previous designs:
like this one, in certain structures of the face and beard, and the headress design of this mask:
Mixing elements from different sources is one of the best ways to keep the designs evolving.
perfect designs, i love these
You need to do a “twist of the day” again!!!

What is Etsy?
I mentioned my misgivings with Etsy in a previous post, and I was interested to here a relevant report on NPR just this morning. You can see the transcription or listen to the story here. It might give a little more background on the Etsy seller debacle.
Also of interest is an NPR story about Etsy from almost a year ago.The older article is about Etsy’s “growing pains”, how Etsy was going to deal with it’s growing base of sellers (800,000 at the time – closer to a million now) and some of those sellers’ desires to increase their own business. The story mentions one seller who saw demand for her products increase beyond Etsy’s capacity to handle the business. So she started doing a large portion of her business outside of Etsy. So she was becoming a success and Etsy was not able to get a cut of the profits.
According to the new policies at Etsy, a seller can have employees doing the crafting, can farm out part of the production to outside manufacturers, pretty much run a business that is more like a factory than what most customers would expect when they are shopping for “handmade”. That’s fine – that just makes it easier for people to start up small businesses, create jobs and all that. But a lot of people joined Etsy years ago just to sell a few handmade goods and make a little extra income, not to become the CEO of a factory. And what is only hinted at in the NPR stories is that Etsy doesn’t really want those individual crafters making handmade goods one at a time on the kitchen table to make a little extra money. They want the “big sellers”, the ones who can churn out product and provide Etsy with a consistently high return. CEO Chad Dickerson has been acting as the voice of Etsy in interviews, but he is not one of the founders of Etsy. He was a former CTO at Yahoo brought on in 2008 to make Etsy into a more efficient money machine. He has no allegiance to the original philosophy of Etsy. He is there to make Etsy profitable and that is all. I can’t blame him for doing his job.
I guess the biggest problem is that they want to have it both ways. They want to be a big business while appearing to be a small business. So what is Etsy? The people who made Etsy years ago, the people making things with their own hands out of their own homes, the ones that gave Etsy it’s quirky, crafty, resourceful image – that’s still the image that Etsy wants to project, but those are the same people whom Etsy will throw under the bus to get the “big sellers”.
But that’s just business.
Sad but true!

Tessellations on Zibbet
Just added some new items for sale in my Zibbet shop.

New mask on Zibbet
Now selling at Zibbet:
This is Saladin, my first item for sale at Zibbet. I’ve actually had an account with Zibbet for some time as an alternative venue to Etsy, I just haven’t used it until now.

You can pledge handmade too!
Zibbet, in case you don’t know, is an online marketplace for individual sellers of handmade items. It sounds a lot like Etsy, and it is – or at least it’s a lot like Etsy used to be.
I’ve been selling on Etsy for a few years now and frankly, I have no complaints. They make transactions very simple and efficient and they offer great visibility and customer service. But I’ve noticed a shift in their fundamental philosophy over the years that is a little troubling. Etsy started small, as a kind of a co-op for artists and artisans to make their work more accessible to a broader market. But as Etsy got bigger and more popular, they changed leadership and they changed policy to make the site more about sales and less about the seller. They seem to want to be a hipster Amazon now, providing as much boho swag to as many buyers as possible. While they claim to prohibit re-selling – purchasing new products wholesale that the seller had no hand in creating and selling it on Etsy as your own, their latest policies have left the door open for some less-than-forthright sellers to do just that. Sellers can pass off factory or sweat-shop made items as one-of-a-kind crafts with a minimum of effort, or get away with outright trafficking of mass-produced, low cost goods if they are willing to pretend to be involved in the creation of those goods.
I’ve been on the fence about all this for a while. Although I’ve been disappointed in the shift in priorities at Etsy, they are still maintaining good consistent service to buyers and in some ways it could be said that they are just providing online shoppers what they want and more of it. But then again, they are increasingly misrepresenting themselves – one might go so far as to say duping the public – by continuing to project an image of artsy, bohemian individualism when they are making a good chunk of their revenue from mass-produced tchochkes from China.
It’s a shame because Etsy still has some really excellent artists. They have some of the best handmade goods you can find online. I’ve stayed with Etsy because of this and because of the ease of doing business there. I haven’t personally felt the pressure of competing with mass-produced and under-priced goods because the stuff that I do is rather far afield of all that. But just because this change hasn’t affected me directly doesn’t mean that i can ignore it. So for a while at least, I’ll continue to have some items posted on Etsy because I appreciate the community there. But I will also be posting items on Zibbet and seeing how it goes there.
A lot of Etsy sellers have migrated to Zibbet lately. Zibbet has been around for a while now, began as a low-cost, less flashy alternative to Etsy but remaining true to the same ethos that Etsy has seemed to abandon. In response to the latest changes at Etsy, Zibbet has set up the website ipledgehandmade.com, as you see in the link above, to reiterate their commitment to the handmade community.

Hey Joel. Thanks for such a comprehensive comparison of the two eStores and especially for pointing out some of the etsy deficiencies. I’ll check Zibbet out. But I also know one of the prime investors of etsy who lives here in yvr and will pass on your comments if you allow…
Thanks Jamie. I wasn’t sure if I wanted to get into all if this business, but I thought I should explain why I’m putting some of my work in Zibbet when I already have an Etsy store. As I said, it was a tough decision because Etsy has really been good to me, but some of their decisions have left me a bit uncomfortable. What I’ve said here isn’t new – I’m sure the folks at Etsy have been hearing similar complaints for some time now. The troubling thing to me is that while they do go out of their way to please buyers, they do very little to assuage concerned sellers. Etsy really should work for the sellers, not the other way around.
Anyway, I’m still in a wait-and-see-how-this-goes stage.
Completely agree with you, Joel.
I can say that I am a bit disappointed with the recent changes at Etsy and I do not know how it will affect my shop.
 How does this new website work? How much do they charge setting items? Thank you!
Zibbet works pretty much the same way Etsy does except that you can get a basic shop set up and post items for free, so there’s no risk in trying it out. They even have a feature (which I haven’t tried yet) for importing listings directly from your Etsy store into your Zibbet store.
Thank you Joel!!
OK I find everything on zibbet.com ! Good luck!
Pingback: What is Etsy? | origamijoel

New masks and Ben folds grids
I’d like to share an interesting video by a friend and fellow tessellator, Ben Parker. You can find a few videos out there showing techniques for folding grids, but this is the first one I’ve seen that shows the process of folding a grid of such size from beginning to end in one sitting. I must commend Ben’s endurance.
Click here to see the video on Ben’s website. You can also go to his Flickr site – there’s a lot of good stuff there.
I wanted to feature this video here for two reasons. First, to address the most frequently asked question I get (probably the most frequently asked question for Ben too): “Where do you get paper with grids in it?” The answer is “You take a piece of paper and fold a grid in it, or if you’re very lucky, a nice person might fold it for you. But most likely you’ll be doing it yourself”. This is inevitably followed by “How long does it take you to do that?” – The answer is “A long time”.
The second thing that interested me in this video is Ben’s technique. It’s unique. I first saw Ben fold a grid in person some five or six years ago at  a convention in NYC and I found it baffling. Folding a grid is one of the most basic things you have to do if you’re going to make origami tessellations and at the time it seemed to me that there just couldn’t be too many ways to go about doing it. Well Ben had a way of doing it that never occurred to me. He breaks up the process of dividing the pleats ever smaller into sequences of iterations working from the center out. I had always worked from one end of the paper to the other, accordion folding, then dividing each accordion fold in half, then dividing all the halves in half, working systematically in one direction until a have the proper number of iterations. Just goes to show that you should never assume that you know all there is to know about anything. There’s always going to be something new.
And speaking of something new… okay that’s a terrible segue, but it’s all I’ve got… how about some new masks at Etsy.
The first is called “Creon” and the second “Hierophant”. I’ve been spending a lot of time lately combining and recombining elements from older designs with new ideas for certain features like eyes and mouths and some decorative elements, sort of tossing everything into a big design stew and seeing what comes out. Hierophant for example has many features in common with the previous “Shakti” design, combined with a headress adapted from the “Bronze Idol” with a lot of modifications to get everything to fit together. It’s like origami alchemy. Well it’s really more like origami evolution, as some bits are carried over from one face to another, with some modifications and new mutations added in each generation. Creon is descended in a roundabout way from the old “Oread” model, a design which has spawned numerous variations since.

Pingback: “Shadow Tessellations” kickstarter | origamijoel

New masks on Etsy

Pingback: New masks and Ben folds grids | origamijoel

A few words about Richard Feynman
I came across this little animated film via an article on Richard Feynman at the Telegraph UK. You really should watch it. It won’t take much of your time; it’s barely more than a minute long. It’s a wonderful animation created to accompany some of Feynman’s comments on science and beauty from an interview in 1981.
Richard Feynman may have been one of the greatest American physicists of the 20th century. He was without a doubt one of the most colorful. I highly recommend reading the semi-autobiographical “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman” and “What do YOU Care What Other People Think” – books full of anecdotes, adventures and science. He was a man of genius, to be sure, but his greatest strength was his insatiable curiosity. He dove headlong into any little thing that piqued his interest and his enthusiasm can’t help but sweep you along for the ride.
If you want more physics, I recommend “QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter” (That’s QED as in Quantum Electro-Dynamics), wherein he describes the theory that won him a Nobel Prize and the diagrammatic language he created to describe it. Feynman has a knack for clear description that makes even a scientific dilettante like me feel like they can almost grasp quantum mechanics.  For slightly less esoteric physics, try “Six Easy Pieces” – six essays from his landmark series of Lectures on Physics considered the “easiest” and most accessible to the general reader (“easiest” being a relative term, mind)
You could say Feynman was a bit of a dilettante himself. He had a visual style of problem solving, as evidenced by the diagrams he created to help decipher quantum mechanics, and he had an interest with the artist’s way of seeing the world. As the interview clip shows, he felt that scientific vision was in no way antithetical to aesthetic appreciation. Quite the contrary, scientific inquiry only gives us more to appreciate. Feynman addressed his artistic curiosity with the same gusto he brought to everything else. He began drawing in the 40’s and took lessons to improve his skills. He continued drawing and painting until his final days. A lifelong admirer of the female form, he tended towards nude figure drawing. It also gave him an excuse to indulge his modest vice of frequenting strip clubs – now it was research.
Gregarious, witty, absolutely brilliant – charming yet blunt, eccentric yet down-to-earth; Richard Feynman is definitely on my list of top five people, living or dead, whom I would want to sit down and have coffee with.
I agree,he was great!

R.I.P. Ray Harryhausen (1920-2013)
One of my childhood heroes, Ray Harryhausen, passed away yesterday. He was an incomparable artist. Many will speak of his influence on modern special effects and many will appreciate his historical role in cinema, but perhaps what one really feels about the man and his art is ultimately dependent on one’s age, and how old they were when they saw their first Harryhausen movie. I don’t know if it’s possible for someone born after 1980, who grew up on a diet of CGI spectacle, to feel the same way about Harryhausen’s creations as someone who remembers a time when such things were done by hand.
“Creation” is the operative term here. To me, the difference is that modern digital effects at best simulate reality (sometimes quite well) – Harryhausen created reality. His creatures were real tangible things. They were the toys we played with as children, the monsters we made out of Play-doh to terrorize armies of little green plastic soldiers. A Harryhausen movie was a child’s sandbox imagination made real. No, the effects didn’t look real in the way that contemporary movie-goers expect – they looked like the fantasies and fears of a ten-year-old boy blown up to epic scale. If you happened to be a ten-year-old boy watching a Harryhausen movie in a darkened theater, it was like seeing your own dreams projected on the screen!   Harryhausen’s animations always bore the mark of the artist. He created every model and shot every frame himself. There is no mistaking a Harryhausen effect and any movie that he worked on, no matter the script, the story or the stars, was a Ray Harryhausen movie. I mean, Laurence Olivier was in “Clash of the Titans”, but it’s still Ray’s movie.

Of course the movies were only excuses to get Harryhausen’s monsters on the screen. Nothing wrong with that. Alfred Hitchcock only did “North by Northwest” as an excuse to do a chase scene on the giant stone faces of Mt. Rushmore.
But it’s not just spectacle. Harryhausen’s creations were characters too (sometimes more expressive than their human co-stars). Ray was an animator in the true sense: he gave inert matter life – spirit – anima.
When you watch the dragon and the cyclops battle it out in “The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad”, you see a real life-and-death struggle. And even though the cyclops was a real jerk throughout the film, I still felt sorry for him when the dragon gets him in the end. He has pathos.
And then there’s the Medusa scene from “Clash of the Titans”. It was Harryhausen’s genius to make the gorgon, not just an ugly women with snakes for hair, but a hideous, creeping thing in the dark – a thing that you must not look at, but you can’t resist…  The atmosphere is a mixture of fascination and dread.
The scene of Perseus leaving Medusa’s lair and holding up the severed head is a deliberate nod to Cellini’s bronze sculpture of Perseus:
Note also the gouts of ichor streaming from Medusa’s neck beneath Perseus’ feet.
Now how often do you see references to Italian Renaissance sculpture in fantasy films these days?
So long, Ray. Thanks for sharing your dreams with us.

Two new masks
The two masks I have to show are new, but familiar. They represent the latest representation of an ongoing process of refinement.
The first is the latest version in what I’ve come to think of as the “nymph” series which began with “Oread” a little over a year ago
There was much about the design that I liked, but I couldn’t help tinkering with it nonetheless.
The second mask is a variation on the Golden Idol from not long ago. The changes here are largely infrastructural, so to speak. I’ve tried to tighten up the design a bit.
In my mind it seems like there should be a perfect way to express each design – the ideal arrangement of every fold.


I’ve been in love with your work since I first came across it a few months ago; and not just the complexity and sculpting quality, but the brilliant use of color in the composition as well.
I’ve been exploring coloring paper lately as a way to bring more life to my models, and no one seems to do it as well as you.  I’ve read what little there  is to be had on the subject online, and I would love it if you and your wife could share some of your wisdom on the subject.
While I would love to hear everything you know on the subject, at the moment I am looking at using bleach on elephant hide to create an uneven coloring on the paper, and would greatly appreciate any tips you have on the process
Pingback: New masks and Ben folds grids | origamijoel

Pagan idols
Two new masks I’ve finished recently share a bit of a pagan theme.
The first simply named “Golden Idol” –
The second, “Faunus”.
Both models are prototypes that I folded last year. Faunus would later inspire the similarly demonic “Azazel”

while the Golden Idol was the springboard for two different designs. A variation of the face would become Vishnu:

and the headdress was the inspiration for the Nouveau tessellation:

These two masks inspired other creations while they themselves languished in darkness, not through any fault of their own, but simply because I was not satisfied with the paper with which they were folded. They just weren’t pretty.
That was, until my wife got some paints she wanted to try out.
The Idol was spiffed up with some gorgeous gold iridescent glaze and became the Golden Idol.
Faunus was treated to some marbling with black, blue, yellow and copper paints. My wife had been experimenting with paper marbling and decided to try the technique on a piece that had already been folded rather than just a flat piece of paper. It worked! And now a model that was a rather drab gray has become quite elegant.
Dude, your stuff is off the chain (vernacular for exquisitely amazing)!  The lips… the lips… the lips… you’ve got lips with pouts!  Is origami supposed to look so kissable? I thought that the natural face would surely not be created for another decade, but as I’ve come to learn and as I like to say, if you get the math right, anything is possible.
Your stuff is awesome! I would love to own such a mask, but I know any of my house guests’ first comments upon seeing it would be, “OMG, did you make that!” A comment that would always be followed by a defeated “no.”  Hopefully it will not be a decade before your book of folding diagrams is released so that I may be able to proudly respond to my friends, “If it weren’t for Joel Cooper, I would not have been able to make this.”
Well thanks for that! Using folded paper to reproduce the curves of a human face is a fascinating challenge to me and it’s what keeps me coming back to the subject. It’s like I’m trying to find the perfect algorithm.
As for the book of diagrams, I’m sorry to say that that is not likely to happen. It’s not that I don’t want anyone else to fold these masks – it would actually be very cool if people did (and a couple of people I know of have successfully reverse engineered some of my designs from my photographs alone, which I whole-heartedly endorse). It’s just that I wouldn’t know how to create useful instructions for making these things. It isn’t a step-by-step process. It’s more of a figure-out-how-all-the-elements-might-fit-together-then-start-folding-from-one-end-until-you-get-to-the-other-and-be-prepared-to-make-some-of-it-up-as-you-go-along process. I actually started this blog as an attempt to figure out how I might be able to teach at least some techniques, but that didn’t go so well. I’m not really very good at teaching and it’s not much fun.
Sorry about that.
As long as you get the math right, the book will be possible 😀  I for one would not be the one to learn by reverse engineering anything.  I guess I’m timid when it comes to exploratory learning (thank you public school) so unless I have an exact recipe to give me the warm and fuzzies as I make it to each and every subsequent step, I shrink away from it.
Some one will appear one day to help you diagram it, I’m sure.
I wish you all the best and keep doing what you do!

Nephele and the Tin Man
Two new masks on Etsy:

The papers for these two masks are of particular interest to me. Nephele is folded from a different paper than the usual elephant hide. I purchased some Khepera paper some time ago from an arts supply store in Germany to try out as an alternative to elephant hide. It is bookbinding paper like elephant hide and has roughly the same weight. It also has some interesting characteristics. It’s thermoreactive – The paper contains little plastic fibers that melt under a heat and darken the paper. The purpose is for bookbinders to use a heated embossing tool to make darkened stamped designs in the paper.

You can see in this model the effect when I folded a basketweave design and then applied heat to the back of the piece only. The background darkened and became smooth when the thermo-sensitive fibers melted, while the foreground retained it’s original lighter color and rougher texture.
An unexpected quality of this paper that I discovered while preparing to fold the Nephele mask is that bleach turns the blue paper lavender! The bleached paper doesn’t darken when you heat it, but when the plastic fibers melt and then cool, the paper becomes quite rigid. Very useful for making masks.
The tin man is just plain old reliable elephant hide, but I made a special effort to make it more interesting. I wanted this mask to look like old metal.

I sprayed and splattered an underpainting of blue, green, red, orange and black inks  and then sponged metallic and iridescent glazes onto gray elephant hide paper after folding the grid but before folding the mask. Using inks and dyes for most of the color, I can create layers of depth without adding layers of thickness to the paper, and the final metallic surface is provided by an acrylic glaze which is flexible enough that it doesn’t impede folding.

R.I.P. Oscar Niemeyer
Yesterday one of the world’s great architects, Oscar Niemeyer, passed on to that undiscover’d country from whose bourne no traveler  returns. He was 104 years old (just a few days shy of his 105th birthday) and continued to create until the very end.
In the mid twentieth century he was one of the leaders of a futuristic aesthetic in architecture. He was given an opportunity to exercise that vision in a way that few architects would dare to hope for – To participate in the design and creation of an entire city! Not just any city, but the new modern capital city of  Brazil.
Brasilia bears the mark of Niemeyer’s vision to this day. The whole city is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, so the original architectural aesthetic is scrupulously maintained. I was aware of Brasilia and its premier architect long before I ever visited Brazil. Niemeyer’s designs are benchmarks of Modernism and no one studying architectural history of the twentieth century could avoid the grand experiment of Brasilia. But I could not at the time imagine what it would be like to live in such a place. The pictures in textbooks seem sterile – all white concrete with no human beings around.
To see these buildings in person is quite another matter, though, for what you don’t get from photographs is how the structures, artificial as they are, really seem to embody the atmosphere of the land. The big geometric shapes feel at home in against the flat horizon and the big clear sky. The white concrete shines in the bright sun.
Niemeyer had a knack for making impossible things possible; buildings that seem to float above the ground like desert mirages. There is a remarkable spirit and joy that shines through those clean lines and graceful curves.


The secret to a long life is to truly live it, and never deny yourself! R.S.

More new masks on Etsy
Two new masks on Etsy are variations of previous masks. I never make quite the same mask twice, even when I create a design I like I might fold it again and again, but I have to tinker with it with each iteration. I’m never quite satisfied, but that’s why I keep going.
What I especially like about these two new masks is the way the way the paper is finished. Folding the model is really only half the work – the wet shaping, bleaching, painting, dyeing, preserving and everything I do to the paper after folding can make or break a good design.
Case in point:
——-Update—- the Dryad mask has been sold, but I’m keeping this entry here with a link to Flickr ——-
This is actually one of my earlier variations of the “Oread” mask. It was folded from black elephant hide and bleached after folding, but I was not satisfied with the results. The folding was fine, but the finishing was unsatisfactory, so into the big box of failures it went.
My wife later found the piece and thought the model was perfectly fine, it just needed a little attention. She had some interference paints to try out and this mask would make the perfect test piece.
The results were amazing! The botched bleaching didn’t look very good as it was, but it made the perfect background for this green/gold interference paint. The lustrous paint changes color with the angle of the light. The black and brown paper underneath and some amber shellac and the model looks like verdi-gris bronze or gold or the wings of a green scarab in different light.
This one was also folded from black elephat hide paper, but this time I knew what I was doing. Properly bleaching black elephat hide paper can create a wonderful effect like carved wood. Amber shellac deepens the effect. This mask is a variation of an earlier mask which is also an evolution of the “Oread” project, so both of these masks are in the same family, so to speak. The Oread line has been very fruitful and taught me a lot about shaping paper.

New tessellations on Etsy

incredible!
Pingback: Copywrong or Newton’s birthday » Colours from Chaos
the use of light in these designs is amazing, you should create a mask using the same style/idea.

Born from Folding


So you couldn’t make it to the presidential debate in Boca Raton. That’s okay, there’s something much more interesting going on right now.
The Jaffe Center for Book Arts at the Florida Atlantic University is having an exhibition of contemporary origami artwork. I am very excited about this show, and not just because some of my own work is included.
The exhibition was inspired by the documentary “Between the Folds” which I have mentioned here before (and I cannot praise enough). The theme is mathematics, science and engineering as explored through modern paper-folding. I think the artists gathered together for this show are some of the best origamists and paper manipulators around. You can see a list of the participants and links to some of their websites on the exhibitions page at the Jaffe Center website. Some are well-known, some are not known as well as they deserve. All are extraordinary. It is really worth your while to have a look, for rarely is a group of artists like this brought together for one show.
The exhibition runs until January 23rd. In addition to the displays of artwork, there will be origami workshops and viewings of “Between the Folds”.
I love your blog joel. Been looking for a source of up-to-date paper awesomeness, and I finally found a winner.
Keep up the good work, your own stuff is amazing too
I happened to be in the FAU Library this afternoon and was really impressed by the variety of paper folding exhibits. My interests are in engineering and mathematics so I was quite taken by the relationship between the art and its practical applications such as the “Miura-ori Fold.”
I love this work! I’m an art student and am super interested in the intricate work you do! Do you have a page with a short biography or an artist statement?

New masks available on Etsy
I’ve just posted two new masks for sale at my Etsy shop:


Pingback: Top Ten Tuesday

Paper engineering
I happened upon a link for paper engineer Matt Shlian and though I’m a little late to the party on this one (he’s been making extraordinary things with paper for quite some time now and I really should have known about him already) I thought I would post something about him here, if only for my own future reference. His work is really inspirational and just poking around his website makes me want to get some paper and an x-acto knife and make something.



He does wonderful two dimensional art as well

Here’s an interesting interview with Shlian:
He says, among other things, that however meticulously he may plan a project before creating it he never really knows quite how it will look until it’s done. Indeed, why bother creating something at all if you already know what it will look like. That’s what keeps us going: not knowing. You can find more news and thoughts and works in progress at his blog here.
I couldn’t help it… I started searching for more paper engineering and fell right down the rabbit hole.
I came back up with some videos, though, of some of the pop-up designs of Peter Dahmen. Have a look:
and this one:
And while I’m at it, how about this delightful “making of” video for a Toshiba advertisement featuring the work of paper artist Sipho Mabona:
If you find all this cutting and folding and gluing and such as inspirational as I do, you may be itching to try some new paper crafting projects too.
Here’s something I’ve just come across and I know I’m going to have to try:The folks at PaperMatrix provide templates and instructions for making three dimensional woven paper objects like these. The designs take the old woven paper heart that many of us learned in grade school and expand the technique into three dimensions. It’s like basket weaving with paper.

These look like really fun projects to try. I know I should start with some of the simpler designs on their website but… well… simple just isn’t my way.
beautiful!
I discovered Matt Shlian recently too. And I was blown away by his work. And then I discover this blog. Amazing what you can do with paper! I’m following this blog!
Pingback: Top Ten Tuesday

New tessellations at Etsy

Geometric art of Morton C. Bradley, Jr.

One of the perks of working in the acquisitions department of an academic library is that hundreds of new books pass through my hands every week. One of the downsides is that I’m working in the acquisitions department, and don’t have the luxury of actually perusing all those books that I process. Every now and again a book catches my eye and I can make a note to myself to look it up again when I have the time.
This book came into the library recently and it certainly caught my eye:Why had I not heard of this man? This stuff is gorgeous!

It is the nature of geometric art that as beautiful as it is, it is an art that seems to exist without the benefit of an artist. It is impersonal in this respect, a fact that Bradley himself acknowledged. He did not assume responsibility for their creation, merely their discovery.

But these are the creations of an incredibly keen mind.
I read about Bradley (as you can here) and learned that he acquired his training and his reputation in art restoration. He was a polymath, unsurprisingly, but his greatest fascination was color.

I was fascinated first by the complex yet harmonious geometry of these forms, but it is really the use of color that makes these sculptures so transcendent. These sculptures are really exercises in color theory in three dimensions. Bradley used geometry as a medium for his scientific exploration of color.

It may be that no one can claim to invent the dodecahedron or stellated icosahedron or  or any geometric figure no matter how complex, since they are all manifestations of mathematics which exist outside of human activity; they just are.
But it was Bradley’s searching mind that synthesized color and form to create these unique images. These objects represent a look into the workings of a very particular and wonderful human mind.

Morton Bradley studied at Harvard and lived most of his life in Massachusetts but had family connections to Indiana and particularly Indiana University. He donated most of his personal collection of paintings as well as his own creative work to the IU Art Museum and it is this institution that published the beautiful book I mentioned at the top of this page, and which inspired me to look further into this amazing artist and scholar.
You can read more about Bradley and see more of his sculptures at the Indiana University site or maybe see if your own local library has a copy of Color and Form.
Incredible. Your observations about Bradley’s use of color are very insightful and made me look at the sculptures in a different light.  Your work is also breathtaking.

Folding Paper – the book!

I’ve just received my copy of the catalogue accompanying the exhibition “Folding Paper: The Infinite Possibilities of Origami” and was pleased to find that it is more than just a catalogue of the show. It does have excellent photographs of the artwork and information about the artists but it also has essays by Meher McArthur and Robert Lang, the curator and consultant for the show respectively, about the history of origami and the connection of modern origami and science.This is a good book for the origami completist; good writing and a wonderful overview of some of the best origamists around today (and me too!) And no, I don’t get a commission from book sales, I just thought it was worth a mention.
And check out International Arts & Artists’ Flickrstream of the show.
A lot of origami luminaries involved. See how many you can name!
And hey – what’s this?

They look familiar…
And yes, the one on the right is simply titled “Mask” – I’m sorry but it’s tough coming up with names for these things.

For sale

For sale at Artfire. I’ve had the Artfire account for quite some time as an alternative to my Etsy shop, but I haven’t used it until now. I’ve just become accustomed to posting on Etsy and comfortable with it’s interface. So this piece, “Cherubino”, will be the inaugural offering on Artfire. We’ll see how it goes. I haven’t figured out all the bells and whistles on Artfire yet (in fact, I noticed grammatical errors in some of the text in the listing and couldn’t figure out how to go back in and edit it!) but transactions should work fine.
By the way, you might notice that this face is very much like the one I have set as the background. I never do two masks exactly the same, but I do on occasion return to old designs and update or enhance them. Cherubino and the green mask in the background are both based on a model I made many years ago – in fact, one of my very earliest designs. I’ve figured out a lot since then, at least as far as my repertoire of tricks and techniques is concerned. I made some technical corrections to the design, but I think esthetically, it was already one of my most successful pieces from the beginning.
I must try Artfire!

Artistry of Eric Joisel

Even if you don’t know the name, I’m sure that you’ve seen examples of his work. The artwork of Eric Joisel continues to pop up over and over again online whenever a gallery is compiled to showcase the height of artistry in folded paper – especially those breathless “I can’t believe this is origami!” or “Look what a single piece of paper can do!” posts. Often with broken links or no accreditation at all. I invite you to go to his official website and take a look at his entire body of work. It is remarkably varied and beautiful.

His animal figures are certainly wonderful but it is surely his representation of the human form that really puts his work beyond any other origami artist. Human figures and faces are difficult to portray in origami convincingly, but Joisel seems to do it effortlessly – from his early masks and figurines from the 90’s….

…to the highly detailed and personalized fantasy figures of later years, he has done what great sculptors do – breathed life into inert matter. That is what sets him apart. The technical skill is unquestionable but the artistry is in something less tangible: the life which is infused somehow into every piece.
When Eric Joisel died in October of 2010, much too soon at the age of 53, I was compelled to post something here about it but I couldn’t think of anything to say. His many friends and admirers spoke to the loss much more eloquently than I could. All I could say is that I wished I had met him. I’ve always admired his artwork and the life and liveliness in his work speaks of a man with a great heart.
When I heard that a retrospective exhibition is going on right now in Angouleme, France, I decided it was a good time to show some of my appreciation for the work of this inspirational artist. The show has been coordinated by the Grupo Zaragozano de Papiroflexia  and Eric’s brother Alain.
And here is a behind-the-scenes video of the setup and grand opening of the show
The pictures at the beginning of this post were taken from the PBS Arts website, from an article about Joisel in connection with the documentary  “Between the Folds” in which he was one of the featured artists.
Here is the segment of “Between the Folds” about Joisel:
If you watch the entire documentary (and you should) you will see people from the fields of science and mathematics drawn into origami for the intrinsic geometry particular to that art form. Joisel came from a background of traditional arts and found in origami just another medium for sculpture, like stone or clay or metal. As an artist, he simply found the medium most amenable to his style.
Origami has suffered for being perceived as something of a novelty act. Why should people be astonished to learn that origami can be a beautiful, incredible thing, and yes, even Art (that exalted species of human activity that must be separated from the mundane acts of ordinary mortals and if you don’t like it, it means you just don’t understand it)? When I see something to the effect of “can you believe it’s just folded paper” I think why shouldn’t it be folded paper? A drawing is just lines on paper, but when you look at an etching by Rembrandt, do you think “can you believe that’s just ink on paper” ? Perhaps you do, it’s pretty amazing what ink on paper can do too. But that’s beside the point. Art can be anything, really, and it’s not an exalted, isolated thing apart from everything – it’s a part of everything. Art is a way of putting life into lifeless things. That is what Joisel did; just look at his work and that’s what you see – life!



Excellent article, thank you for featuring this exhibition. I couldn’t help but laugh at 4:10 in the video where you can hear a child in the background say “C’est quoi ça?” (“What’s that?”). Sadly I couldn’t make out the response.
I wasn’t expecting to see Joe Wu, Dave Brill and Bernie Peyton (among others) either!
Eric had many friends and admirers among the international origami community and I suspect that anyone who could possibly be there, was there. I wish I could have gone!
I should point out, since I neglected to in the post, that I believe the video of the exhibition was taken by Jorge Pardo of the Zaragoza Origami Group.
Pingback: Top Ten Tuesday
I attended an oragami exhibition at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem MA several years ago. I fell in love with Eric’s work and especially one piece in the show: Self Made Man. I emailed Eric and arranged to buy the piece and pick it up from the museum. It is still one of my most prized posessions and it brings me joy every day.

For sale

The Prophet
My very favorite!

For sale

For sale at Etsy
like especially this one , that It makes me ask a simple question : how much cost ?
Eric the mad folder
If you click on the picture it will take you to the Etsy shop page for that piece.
Yes! Finally someone writes about nikon coolpix 5700.

For sale

Hrothgar at Etsy

Paper mosaics
When I first came across origami @tessellation online about twelve years ago it was not from a search for origami, it was from a website for geometry enthusiasts. It should be no surprise that this particular form of paperfolding seemed to spring up among mathematicians and scientists – those who find satisfaction in order and elegant solutions to complex problems. Nor should it be a surprise that the earliest practitioners of origami @tessellation often had names adorned with letters fore and aft, such as “Dr.” and “PhD”. The name “tessellation” used to designate this kind of origami was borrowed from the field of mathematics, referring to the regular division of a plane by repeating geometric shapes.
“@Tessellation” from “tesserae”, the little squares of stone or glass used by the ancient Romans to create mosaics.
Now there are a couple of ways to go about designing a new tessellation. The technique I settled upon years ago was to pre-crease a grid in a piece of paper and then using the geometry of the grid alone, start folding in an improvisational way and see what works and what doesn’t.  It can be hit and miss, but it suits my style. Another approach is to plan the design out first and create a crease pattern before you begin folding.  Origami really is math incarnate, so if you know the math you can have a fairly good idea if a design will work before you make your first crease.
You could even create software to help realize your ideas.

Alex Bateman has a scientific approach to origami. He also divides his time folding with such things as classifying non-coding ribonucleic acids. I believe I first encountered his work (origami, not genetic) on his user page at the Sanger Institute website when I was just getting my feet wet in the whole origami @tessellation thing, many years ago. That page is gone but he has a website of his own since around 2006. That’s absolutely ancient in internet time, but it is still a valuable resource, not just for images of his own work but for the Tess software and e-books that are available there.
And though he has been on a bit of an origami hiatus, happily he is still folding and creating new crease patterns to share.
As his nom de pliage “Paper Mosaics” implies, Alex is true to the literal meaning of Origami Tessellation: folded paper mosaics. He explores the great variety of geometric forms that can divide a plane, many that would be difficult if not impossible to replicate from a pre-creased grid.
If you are new to @tessellation then you might not be aware of his work, but I highly recommend having a look. It will inspire you as it had inspired me. He can even show you how to fold your very own origami DNA double helix.

It wet my appetite and peaked my curiosity. Woah! Where you at?
I can’t tell you how hard it was for me to write that post title; the grammar nerd in me cringes. But I am trying to reform and accept the natural evolution of a living language (I will not, however, give up my semicolons). After all, when you are too uptight about proper written language you expose your own writing skills to increased scrutiny. My writing is not perfect.
Language has always interested me because it does evolve and like a living species, its current form reflects the adaptations of environmental pressures upon the contingencies of previous forms. You can look at any animal and among all the adaptations that suit that creature to its natural ecological niche, you can see traces of previous adaptations that no longer serve any purpose. You needn’t look any further than your own body for examples. Take goose bumps.
Goose bumps, goose pimples or goose flesh, are caused by tiny muscles at the base of each hair contracting to make the hair stand up. It’s called the piloerection and most mammals have this reflex in response to fear or to cold. The hair standing on end makes the animal appear larger to intimidate whatever is frightening the poor beast. It also traps more air to insulate the animal from cold. Of course humans don’t have nearly enough hair for either result to be effective, but we still have the reflex. It is a vestige of our hirsute ancestry.
The English language has goose bumps. I thought of this when I heard someone on the radio say that something had “whet his appetite”. This is a fairly common expression, but the “whet” part isn’t all that common in spoken English. There are many expressions in English that use the sharpness or the act of sharpening as a metaphor, when you think about it. The word “sharp” itself can mean someone who is clever or fashionable (on the “cutting edge”). Your interest or attention may be “keen” and you “hone” your skills. But honing, whetting and keen are these days perhaps less recognized as referring to blades as they are for their metaphorical meanings. I suppose it could be that people just don’t sharpen their tools much anymore. The word “whet” has the added disadvantage of being a homophone for the much more common “wet”. One usually uses a whet-stone to whet their blade. A whet-stone is generally moistened with oil or water for the purpose, making it a wet-stone as well as a whet-stone, and a blade is wet when it’s whet. So I can see how people get confused about the whole thing. Although “wet his appetite” doesn’t make a lot of sense as an expression, how else would people hear it if they aren’t familiar with the word “whet”? Besides, people often use expressions without knowing what the words really mean. And such idioms are often the only time you will hear certain words that are no longer in common currency. Idioms trap words in the language like insects trapped in amber. Occasionally something will pique your curiosity or your interest, but how often have you piqued yourself when you felt pride, or been piqued when your pride was deflated, or piqued your friends by using obscure words in conversation. “Pique your curiosity” is still a common expression, but people could be forgiven for thinking “peak your curiosity” when they hear the phrase if the word “pique” is otherwise alien. And it’s another darned homophone. The English language is full of them and that’s part of the problem right there. The English language is a hodge-podge of languages all cobbled together around a loosely Latin syntax. Pique comes from the Old French “piquer”, to prick, which in turn is derived from the Vulgar Latin “piccare”. Peak possibly comes from the  Old English “pic” for a sharp pointy thing (like a pike) which is ultimately derived from the same root as pique but through a different etymological path.  There’s really no good reason for us to have two words that came from basically the same root be spelled so differently yet be pronounced exactly the same. Similarities in spelling should indicate a common root and divergences in pronunciation should indicate changes in meaning. But the English language seems to have infinite ways to spell things but not many ways to pronounce them. At least the spellings bear evidence of the words’ peregrinations, even if the lazy English tongue (or even lazier American tongue) makes them all sound the same. These are the goose bumps that arise from time to time to puzzle, amuse, perplex or pique us with evidence of the language’s convoluted past.
So I can be a stickler for spelling – not because of some arbitrary adherence to rules, but because the way words are written gives clues to the word’s history. To misspell a word is to obliterate it’s history.
Consider our strange relationship with the letter H. The English language sticks H’s everywhere and seemingly for no reason since many of them are silent: the H in what, where and why. H is used to change the sound of hard consonants to soft in combination – like C to CH or S to SH but it also changes some letters in arbitrary ways. Why is the GH in “enough” pronounced like an F, but in “bough” the GH is silent and “ghost” the H does nothing at all? These are all presumably vestiges of our language’s tortuous history and it may be at different times and under different conditions the H was doing exactly what people expected it to do. But the H lingers long after its reason has gone.
Until just a few years ago I thought whoa was spelled “whoa”. That’s how I had always seen it written. Granted, as a verbal interjection, you were more likely to hear it spoken than to see it written. But one phenomenon of the ubiquity of the internet and electronic media is the return of the written word. After a long hiatus when people communicated only by phone (that’s telephone, not iPhone) and folks lamented the demise of written communication and predicted that illiteracy would return, people are writing again. Well, sort of. E-mail, blogging and texting – it tends to be informal almost to the point of practical illiteracy. For many there is no distinction in style between written and oral speech; they simply write exactly the way they talk. So if you say “whoa” in oral conversation, you write “whoa” in written conversation. Problem is, there are words you hear spoken all the time but you seldom see them written. English being the way it is, you learn how to write by reading. There are rules, but there are so many exceptions to those rules that it’s best to simply expose yourself to proper writing by reading as much as you can until you just get a sense for what is correct.
But you can read half a library’s worth of books before you see “whoa” in print. Before Keanu Reeves, it wasn’t even in common parlance outside of horse ranches. Now it’s everywhere and if people are inclined to say it, they are compelled to write it. But how is it spelled? When I first saw “woah”, I assumed that the writer had a just vague notion that it started with a W, it had an OA and there’s an H in there somewhere; tossed the letters together and hoped for the best.  They couldn’t be bothered to check the spelling on such an inconsequential word. Or maybe they weren’t speculating on the spelling but actually thought that this was correct. But had they seen it written that way before? That is the only way they would think the spelling is correct, since the spelling of “whoa” is arbitrary. The word existed a long time before anyone bothered to write it down and as a simple mono-syllabic interjection, more of a yelp than an actual word, you could spell it any way you pleased. Yet the spelling was formalized, since some people really like rules, and consensus spelled it “whoa”. Didn’t they? The problem is, people are more likely to read the word “whoa” (or “woah”) on the internet than in any book.  So is that where consensus should lie? When people type the word “whoa” or “woah”, they are likely to judge its correctness by what they have seen before. And what they have seen before was on the internet, not in a book, and there’s about a 50/50 chance which way it might have been spelled.
Then there’s grammar, and a problem: when do the rules help communication, and when do they hinder?
Where you at?
At first blush this would seem to be no more than an example of atrocious grammar. At least that’s how I reacted when I first heard these words spoken. But now I’m inclined to defend to defend this construction. Grammar is, after all, a way to make oneself understood, and the above question is not only understandable but its form clarifies the kind of response the interlocutor desires. The proper phrase should be “Where are you?”, but this could be interpreted in several ways. Think of context: When would somebody ask this question? If you are talking to someone face to face, you know where they are – they’re right in front of you. If you are speaking to someone on their home phone, you know where they are – they’re at home, on the phone. If you write someone a letter, you know where they are (you addressed the envelope). Maybe you are in the dark and you can hear someone but not see them. You might ask “Where are you?” and they might respond “Over here.”
But more likely you would ask this question when talking to someone on a cell phone. This is the most common situation in which you would know someone can hear you but you don’t know where they are. In fact, I would go as far as to say that the cell phone is the single reason that the phrase “Where you at?” became not only common, but in a sense necessary. Before the cell phone, the very fact that you could communicate with someone at all meant you usually had a fairly good idea where they were. They were either right in front of you or they were on the other end of a telephone line.  If you asked someone where they were, it was likely you were asking them to clarify their location in some relative way; you are asking because they are not where you expect them to be. They are  calling from a phone booth (“Where are you?”) or they are at home instead of  picking you up at the airport (“Where are you?”). The simple question can be interpreted in different ways and may be an invitation to an explanation.
But after the cell phone, talking to someone no longer meant you had a clue where they are. You might even call someone just to ask them where they are, something which had previously been impossible (and redundant). You had to know where someone was if you wanted to contact them. Well, unless you had a walky-talky. Then you might ask for someone’s co-ordinates. “Where you at?” is just an informal way to say “Give me your co-ordinates”. That’s the purpose of the “at” at the end of that question. It is contrary to the well-known proscription against ending a sentence with a preposition and it should be redundant besides, but it actually serves a purpose. The “at” frames the desired response – an object of the preposition, e.g. at home, at the store, at the laundromat, at such-and-such address. The ungrammatical “at” clarifies the kind of answer the question demands: a clear, physical location. Whereas “Where are you?” can be inflected to require a relative answer (“Why are you there and not here?”), “Where you at?” is unambiguous. And forget about that never-end-a-sentence-with-a-preposition business. A preposition needn’t always be followed by an object and English syntax allows the preposition at the end of a sentence if the object of the preposition is implied or unnecessary. The “at” in the question “Where you at?” is implying the substantive which is the answer to the question. Of course the most heinous error would be the absence of a verb in the phrase “Where you at?”. Well that is a problem , but I say it’s really a matter of esthetics. “Where are you at?” sounds awkward. “Where’re you at?” isn’t much better. The “are” is really unnecessary when the “at” already implies a state of being “at” some location.
To make another strained analogy to biological evolution: consider the panda’s thumb. Pandas eat bamboo. To get at the good parts of the bamboo they need to grab and hold the stalks with their paws and peel the outer layers with their teeth. Thumbs are really good for grabbing and holding things but pandas evolved from carnivores that had already adapted their digits for claws. In fact, the ancestor bear’s claws were just too claw-like to reconfigure into an opposable digit, but other parts of the paw could serve the purpose. Over time, a bone from the wrist shifted in place and enlarged to form a rudimentary thumb.
This is an over-simplification, and I invite you to read the late, great Stephen Jay Gould’s essay on the subject for details.
The panda is an odd beast, and one would not expect that a bear adapted for carnivory would become a giant bamboo eating machine, but it happened. And like a bear may have to find a thumb where none existed to become a new kind of animal, language finds a way to put itself together from its divers parts to communicate in a new way. After all, twenty or thirty years ago there were few occasions when the average person would find it necessary to ask someone “where you at?”. But this is the world we live in now.
And that’s where it’s at.
Are you multilingual, Joel? I ask because last year I took a (French) linguistics course and was amazed by the complexity of language evolution. As a result, I worried about the rapid extinction of languages which ended up driving me to begin learning more languages. Unfortunately, learning two new languages at once (one of them without a class) was a bit beyond me so I have to learn a bit slower than I would like.
I really enjoy being able to use language evolution as an excuse. I may pronounce something “improperly”, but if someone corrects me I simply tell them that I’m helping the language evolve 😛
I did take a few years of Spanish in high school but that was many, many years ago and I’ve lost much through lack of practice. I once attempted to teach myself Gaelic, but that didn’t take. So in short, I’m not as multilingual as I wish I was. I really wish I had learned more languages when my brain was young and spongy, it gets much harder as you get older.
But I’ve always been interested in languages, especially the history that is encoded in language. I’m fascinated by the tension between the desire to standardize language and the natural tendency of langage to change.
Hwoh, Joel!
As the daughter of a cold-type printer turned major newspaper conglomerate vice president (retired), who was the son of an early 20th century, western US newspaperman (founder, reporter, printer, salesman), spelling and syntax was all-important to me. Until I matured enough to see the language underneath.
Thanks for your wonderful essay.
And, care to share your caffeine supplier?
I’m the son of an English teacher myself (also retired) and grew up knowing the difference between “can I” and “may I” (Q: “Can I go to the bathroom?” A:”I don’t know, can you?”) Learning the rules was never as interesting as learning why they are as they are.
As for caffeine – I’ll take whatever I can get whenever I can get it, but I go for the good stuff straight from Brazil when possible.
Hello there, Joel! I love your entertaining and informative article. Thank you!
I would not be considered by most as a native speaker(I am an Asian in Asia) but I am passionate about English! I grew up in an English-speaking environment as my father taught English.
“To misspell a word is to obliterate it’s history.”
It would be great if you could have an article on the use of ‘its’ vs ‘it’s’ and ‘your’ vs ‘you’re’.
My mother made sure my diet had little caffeine…
May the best of times be with you always!
Thanks Clariissa,
     The problem of “its”, “it’s”, “your” and “you’re” I would categorize as carelessness more than anything else. Carelessness in the true sense, in that it betrays a lack of care. Most errors I see in written English seem to indicate a writer with little experience in reading, who is satisfied to write in an approximation of spoken English.
Ironically, I often find that the most conscientious writers in English are non-native English speakers since their experience with the language is more closely tied to reading it than to hearing it spoken casually everyday.
Clariissa – I have a pet peeve blog that includes those and a few more. “peak/pique/peek” is in there, as well. I tried to make the piece informative and entertaining.
http://stephenlwilson.blogspot.com/2013/01/pet-peeves.html
joelcooper – Thank you for understanding my concerns! You have verbalized some important details in a thorough manner, which is appreciated. It is comforting to know that there are others as passionate as I am regarding this topic.
Thank you in advance for allowing my link. Hopefully you don’t consider it to be spam, as I am trying to help Clariissa. I will be promoting this page, as well. Thanks! 😎
P.S.
Amazing masks, yours!

Painting paper and folding a mask
I mentioned previously the “bubble method” used to paint some of the papers I’ve used for folding. Here’s a little more about the technique and a little insight into folding a mask as well.
This will be black elephant hide painted with three different water-soluble paints: basic white acrylic, blue/gold metallic and gold/green interference paint. The combination of a basic contrasting color – in this case white to contrast the black paper – and a metallic color, seems to give good results and the interference paint has a subtle effect; it doesn’t have much color of it’s own, but creates a bit of a sheen on a dark background that shifts from one color to another in different light. My wife has collected many different kinds of paints, dyes and inks over the years and she likes to experiment with them in different combinations to see what they can do. This painting is such an experiment.

Three containers are prepared with a little bit of water, a glob of dish detergent and an equal blob of paint (proportions are approximate). The paints, soap and water are mixed thoroughly and brought out to the paper which has been laid out on a bunch of newspaper (the following process can get messy).
And the bubbling begins!

Just stick a straw in the paint mixture and blow. You probably used to do this in your milkshake as a child, to your parents’ consternation. Maybe you still do. The technique is pretty much the same, except the soap will make the mix foam up rapidly.
Now my wife found this technique online and in that tutorial it was recommended to foam up a large bowl of paint and holding the paper over the bowl, lower it into the bubbles. The paper we have here is too large to do this and the bubbles don’t really want to stick to the elephant-hide paper (one of the qualities of elephant-hide is that it is relatively stain resistant). So we lay the paper out and spoon the foam onto the paper.

Just pile it on.
Now you have to wait a while for the bubbles to dry and break down and on elephant hide the effect is fairly subtle. Once the above mess had dried, my wife did it all over again for another layer and it was still fairly subtle, but the over-all effect is a kind of cloudy, cobwebby distribution of color. Very nice.
Paper successfully painted and looking much better than it did before, I have to figure out what to do with it. I had been doing some modifications on the recent “Oread” design that I was eager to try out, and I thought it would be worthy of some really nice paper. Only one potential problem:  the mask is 96 creases across at a minimum and the paper is 35cm wide.
Let me explain. Each model has a minimum number of folds necessary to fully realize the form. Whatever grid I use must have at least that minimum number of creases to accommodate them. More complex pieces have more folds. Most of my earlier masks are on grids 64 pleats across. The more recent designs have more complex folds and require grids 96 pleats across. The numbers aren’t arbitrary – the grids are folded by either dividing the paper in half or in thirds and then dividing each of those sections in half, and each of those halves in half, and so on until the proper number is achieved (this is an “accordion” or “fan” fold). Ultimately, the number of divisions will equal x times 2 to the nth power, where x is the starting number of divisions and n is the number of times the divisions are halved. So if you start with a paper divided in two and then divide each section in half 5 times, you get 2 times 2 to the fifth power = 64 divisions. If you start with paper divided into thirds, you get 3 times 2 to the fifth power = 96. Trying to get a grid with a number of divisions that doesn’t follow this formula gets messy, so I try to stick with grids that are 32, 48, 64 or 96 divisions across.
Usually this works out fine, because the paper I use comes in sheets 100 x 70 cm. I can cut it in half and get a piece of paper 50 cm. wide for a grid 96 pleats across and each pleat will be a little more than 5 mm. wide – a good size to work with. I can cut the paper into quarters and have sheets that are 35cm. wide that will take a grid 64 pleats across and the pleats will still be a little over 5 mm. wide.
But what I have here is a piece of paper 35 cm. wide and I need a 96 pleat grid for the mask I wish to fold. The pleats will end up being almost 3.5 mm. wide. That’s a little smaller than I would like. But not impossible.

The paper is actually about 34 cm. across; I had to trim the edges a bit. You can see in the back view below that the pleats are about a third of a cm. wide. The paint doesn’t effect folding much. I didn’t crack or flake off. The paint or the soap or the combination of both gives the paper a slightly waxy feel, but the paper still folds cleanly.

The design I’m going to fold is recorded in this rather sad looking piece of paper.

You can see the remnants of a face in the front view. Below that is the back view, which actually has the most useful information – all the nuts and bolts that hold the design together.  It looks a mess because it has been folded, unfolded and folded again over and over as I worked out the right combination of creases to get what I wanted. It will serve as a sort of road map when I start folding the new mask. I don’t write down or diagram anything – I just have a bunch of these partially folded pieces that I use for reference.

I started folding at the top and worked down the center line and on the left side of the face, consulting the “road map” with each fold.

At this point. more than half of the mask has been folded, and I don’t need the road map anymore. The mask is symmetrical so I can use the information on the completed side to fold the rest of the mask.

Finished!

Awesome! I like the colors that you use to paint! It’s very stylish!
What was it like folding the first mask?
I tried making a mask in @tessellation by looking at one of your masks, it felt like molding clay into a mask at first for me.
At some point when using the valley and mountain folds I found this to be a journey of fun.
I hope that someday this could be taught to people.
Thank you for your time.
Excuse me mister cooper but I would like to know, do you precrease the grid then cut the hexagon, of do you cut the hexagon first? Thankyou very much if you answer. Keep up the good work Mr Cooper!
It’s easier to cut the hexagon first and then fold the grid, if I know that I want a hexagon. Sometimes I precrease the grids before I know what I’m going to do with them, and then I fold a full rectangle and cut them down as necessary later.
ok thanks very much Mr cooper!
both method and result are fascinating!!
Pingback: Как красить бумагу для оригами | Планета Оригами
Pingback: New Tessellated Origami Masks by Joel Cooper | multiplode6.com
Pingback: New Tessellated Origami Masks by Joel Cooper | My Website
Pingback: Origami Masks by Joel Cooper on SocialRouge.ca
Pingback: Maschere astrali ricavate dalle increspature della carta - Il blog di Jacopo Ranieri
Pingback: Le Maschere Origami di Joel Cooper | FOLLIA CREATIVA: inspiration, spot, guerrilla, flash mob, viral
Pingback: Tessellated Origami Masks Covered in Intricate Patterns | Must See
Pingback: New Tessellated Origami Masks by Joel Cooper (11 Photos) | FunCage
Pingback: New Tessellated Origami Masks by Joel Cooper (11 Photos) - My Website
Pingback: Conheça as máscara de origami de Joel Cooper
Pingback: Tessellated Origami Masks by Joel Cooper | Inspiration Grid | Design Inspiration
Pingback: Origami masks created by Joel Cooper - OZONWeb by OZON Magazine | OZONWeb by OZON Magazine
Pingback: Origami masks created by Joel Cooper - OZONWeb by OZON Magazine | OZONWeb by OZON Magazine
Hi! I think your work is amazing and the result is even more! I just wanted to ask if this color technique could be applied on tissu/textile as well?
many bravo anyway!
I don’t know – it would probably depend on the paints. You just have to try it and see.
Joel I love your work origami is my passion I’m always striving to do more beautiful and complicated pieces. you have been an I inspiration for me. Have you considered taking an apprentice or? for me this would be a dream. Please let me know your thoughts I’m eager to learn.You can email if you would be so inclined mikeboz80@gmail.com
Pingback: Origami maske by Joel Cooper | Pixelizam
Pingback: You Would Not Believes What These Masks Are Made Of. The Artist Is A Real Master! Wow! » 5Trend
Pingback: Conheça as máscara de origami de Joel Cooper - Adoro Papel
WOW. I want to do this but my origami skills are nonexistent… Better start off on something small 🙂
Hello Mr. Cooper,
i am a humongous fan of your masks and origami work in general. I have questions concerning the folding of a mask. i can crease a triangle grid with no problem, I’ve practiced all of the required tessellations, looked at your steps on the models you’ve created but i just don’t know how or where to start. I’ve created a few models but i just cant seem to form any of the facial features constructed. if you have any tips or instruction that can help please email me at (SorryItzLeo@gmail.com)
Thank you so much,
Leo
neat fold, ill try bubble method and add mc
Pingback: ‘Naiad’, Designed by Joel Cooper – Tom's Origami
Pingback: ‘New’ Tessellations – Tom's Origami

Painted papers
My favorite paper has excellent properties for folding but it only comes in a few colors: black, white, and few shades of gray and brown. Fortunately, some of the characteristics that make it great for the my style of folding – its strength, its surface, consistent texture and its ability to accept moisture without much distortion, make it great for painting and dyeing as well. Now I’m pretty good at folding paper, but my wife is a genius at color.
She has tried some new techniques for enlivening the rather blah papers that I like to fold. You can see some of the results in my latest mask, Alberich.
The technique is very interesting: she mixed water-based paints with dish detergent and water and used a drinking straw to blow bubbles into the mix to get a nice bubbly foam. She then scooped of some of the foam and plopped it onto paper (I got to help. It was fun!). When it dries, the paint is deposited in a fine tracery that looks kind of like the veins in stone.

The effect can be as subtle or as dramatic as you want. This is off-white paper with black and green paint.
This is black paper with metallic paints. The precreasing is done and it’s ready to be folded into…something.
In person, the colors are more subdued than they appear in the photograph. The paints are rather irridescent, so they flash at certain angles. I think it will look wonderful as a mask.
What is your favorite paper?
It’s “elephant hide” paper, or “elefantenhaut” produced by Zanders in Germany. It is sometimes marketed in the U.S. as Wyndstone Marble. It’s not an origami paper, per se, but produced for bookbinding, so it’s a heavier paper but it holds a crease well. I began using it almost ten years ago and at that time it was possible to obtain in the U.S. in a wide pallette of colors. There may be other papers with the same characteristics I could use; I’ve just become accustomed to this particular paper.
OMG! I love this paper! Great choice!
Congrats!
Raffaela Loffredo
origamicuritiba.blogspot.com
Pingback: Top Ten Tuesday
absolutely fantastic! Congratulations!
Speechless here.  Please keep on making these beautiful works of art..
Pingback: Papel, pintura, agua y jabón | Fedrigoni Club
Pingback: Papel, tinta, água e sabão | Fedrigoni Club

Twist of the day #1
You can see a brief overview of origami @tessellation by the origami historian David Lister for the British Origami Society here. This article, it should be noted, is probably about a decade old. A lot has happened with origami @tessellation in the last ten years. You can find more recent information at the Origami Resource Center here.
Lister’s article mentions two pioneers who would be very influential in the later development of @tessellation: Resch and Fujimoto.

Resch was more interested in architectural applications. In origami, his work would be more influential in what is usually referred to as “origami corrugation”
Fujimoto designed more traditional origami, but origami that was unusually geometric and abstract. Many involved pleats that collapse at their intersections to form petals or scales:
In some cases the pleats collapse in the same direction around their intersection , i.e., all clockwise or all counterclockwise, to form a new structure  – a twist fold.The above images and more useful  information on @tessellation can be found at Origami USA’s online publication The Fold.
This is from Andy Wilson’s old site SpunDreams, which was a huge influence on me when I began folding tessellations.

This is the stuff that got me started with Origami @tessellation around the year 2000. Andy’s work was influenced by Chris Palmer’s Shadowfolds, which in turn were influenced by Fujimoto’s twist folds. I spent countless hours reverse engineering these designs. This is how I learned @tessellation, and it’s not a bad way to do it, for while there are a lot more styles of folding that are called “@tessellations” these days, just about everything you need to know about how to fold them can be learned from these earlier, Fujimoto inspired designs. And the patterns are often clearer and easier to understand.
All of which leads me ultimately to the real reason for this post…
I had been meaning for quite some time to create a sort of catalog of twist folds. With each new mask and tessellation, I try to do something I’ve never done before, and I’ve often created new twists to attack increasingly complex challenges. Now, you would think that since all of my pieces are folded on 60 degree triangle grids and there are only so many ways pleats could intersect on such a matrix, there should be a limited number of twists necessary to accommodate them. You’d be surprised.
I want to document the twists I’ve used, their characteristics and how I’ve used them. I’ve decided to break up this catalog into smaller easy to digest installments, maybe two or three twists in each post, or even just one if it is a particularly interesting twist. Whether it’s one twist or more, the posts will be called “Twist of the Day”, and this is the first.
The first TOD must be the most essential twists for a tessellator – the triangle twist and the hexagon, or hex twist (I’m only going to be dealing with triangular grids, since that’s what I work with). There’s a video tutorial for folding a hex twist here, which also has a link to a video tutorial for folding a triangle grid. Here’s a pdf from Eric Gjerde  with instructions for folding triangle, hexagonal and square twists. I should provide a tutorial of my own, but for this post I’m just going to let others do the work for me.
These two twists are fundamental to any beginner in origami @tessellation. They are the nuts and bolts of all my work, and if you’re starting out, you would do well to practice them until you can fold them in your sleep.
I’ll leave you with some images of my earlier work, from around 2005-2006, that feature these two twists.
I like how the layout looks.
They are beautiful against the window! It’s like stained glasses!
man! you’re really good!  By the way,   thanking you for subscribing to paperwoman’s blog!
WHY HAVEN’T YOU MADE MORE OF THESE???
The TODs I mean.
Sometimes hopeful ambitions give way to the plain necessities of everyday life, and in the drudgery of doing from day to day what merely must be done, the light of that onetime hope becomes a painful glare in the corner of the eye – a flashing pain in the back of the head – the burden of what might have been.
So life can make lies of our best intentions and all the ALLCAPS and extraneous question marks can do nothing to change that.
Pingback: 50 Decoraciones que puedes hacer casi gratis con papel – Marcianos.com
Pingback: 50 Extraordinary Beautiful DIY Paper Decoration Ideas - Indie Artist Connect
Pingback: 50 Extraordinary Beautiful DIY Paper Decoration Ideas – News Popcorn
Pingback: Expresiones de arte con origami tradicional y contemporáneo | Revista .925 Artes y Diseño

Tiny tessellations
I’ve done tiny tessellations before. They’re fun and challenging in a different way than ordinary tesses.
They also have the advantage of taking much less time to complete. They may take two or three hours to fold, but that is a far cry from some of the very large, involved models that I’ve done which may take two or three weeks, or in some cases several months.
As an antidote to some of the larger projects I’ve been preparing for the past few months, I’ve done several tiny tessellations to break up the drudgery of precreasing very, very big grids. I’ve created a new set on my Etsy shop to sell these cute little tessellations and you can check them out here.
Hello Joel.
I’m a huge fan of your work. When people ask me why I love origami I show them your blog and photos and watch the look of amazement on their faces. You really have taken @tessellations to another level.
My favourite piece is the Gnome King, it’s so realistic. I’ve managed to deconstruct most of it but got stuck on the beard. I noticed it’s based on your Brambles tessellations and still can’t work out how you’ve got the twist in. It looks like a series of incomplete triangle twists but all I end up with is a ripped or screwed up bit of paper. Any hints or explanation you could give to explain how to do it would be most appreciated.
Thanks for being such an inspiration.
Oh, that tessellation pattern is not easy to fold and it is even harder to explain. I use twists like those in a lot of dimensional tessellations. They’re based on hex twists with two sides inverted – that is, the hex twist is collapsed with four pleats falling in the usual way and two on opposite sides tucked inside out, as it were, with mountain folds switched for valley folds. I’m really awful at explaining it, but maybe some of the images that my friend Mimickr on Flickr made deconstructing some of my folds could help: http://www.flickr.com/photos/origami_joel/sets/72157594157584074/
The “iso-area” twist is an example of the hex twist with alternating pleats inverted – three pleats go out and three pleats go in and the twist looks the same on the front of the paper as on the back.
I don’t know if any of this helps, but it might keep you busy for a while!
i can’t find this mask. how did you get to it?
This is the Gnome King: https://www.flickr.com/photos/origamijoel/5381770501/in/set-1783175
Hello,
I’m almost gutted you responded to me.  I finally managed to work it out last night on my own!  I worked it out from another tessalltion of yours that I can’t remember the name of (it was yellow/ gold with pink splodges).  Well, I worked out the crease pattern and have no idea how to fold it easily and solidly.  (If you want it I can scan it in and e-mail you or something – I’m not great on technology hence why I love folding a piece of paper.)
Thanks, though, that link you sent me really helps – because I tend to need a flat surface to create the twists and figured there must be some way of constructing the beard flat and pull it into shape afterwards.
I can see why you don’t do crease patterns for your masks, there is an element of artisitc judgement when it comes to the actual face part and shaping.  I have marked a CP to help me deconstruct and repeat what you’ve done (because I keep running out of paper) but it’s probably a bit of a mess.
It’s only in the deconstruction of your work I can see the ingenuity that’s gone into creating it.  Thanks again and I look forward to see more of your creations.

Ears burning
I began what should have been an ordinary Monday with a curious sensation: My ears were burning. That’s what you used to say when you discovered that people were talking about you. The metaphorical otic trauma came in a form peculiar to this internet age: I found my e-mail inbox deluged with messages like ” so-and-so added you as a contact” and “such-and-such added you to her circle” and “whos-a-ma-bob is following your blog”.
It was revealed to me that I had been featured on the popular website This Is Colossal. Colossal indeed – the effect was immediate. On Sunday, 25 people visited this blog, a perfectly satisfactory number for a blog which is updated maybe once a year. Monday, over 1000 visitors.
Design blog Inhabitat and artist blog Artist a Day have also picked up the coverage, the latter with a brief bio by permission. I must thank everybody involved for this attention, particularly Artist a Day, whose express purpose is to highlight the work of often under-exposed artists, and connect people who love art with people who create it.
A side effect of all this attention: This blog has followers now, which means I’m going to have to start blogging in earnest. There are a lot of things to talk about.
i found your blog via Hello Hydraengia blog. She has a terrific blog and shows us cool blogs she has come across.
Joel:
Love your work.  I found you on Inhabitant. The first work I saw reminded me of Louis Sullivan’s fantastic geometrical organic inspired work.  I’m guessing you have seen it but if not, I think you will love it.
Cheers,
Ralph, an architect and admirer from St. Louis
I was wondering — I kept getting all these Joel blurbs on my RSS feed and all from different places, all saying the same thing. About time the trend-setters discovered you. Rock on.
Hey Joel,
Glad to see more and more people are enjoying looking at your creations. I’ll never forget when you brought some of them to Bazaar, Kansas a few years ago.
So cool. Wish you all the best.
Ralph – In fact, Louis Sullivan is one of my favorite architects, and a great inspiration for my work, but I think you’re the first person to make a connection, though. I love the way he balances the weight of complex texture and pattern. I’m also a fan of Gaudi, and I think his influence can be seen particularly in this piece as well.
Philip – It seems like I get to be an overnight sensation every five years or so. Just when I was getting comfortable with relative obscurity.
Tyler – Great to hear from you. I remember that impromptu exhibition. I’m glad to know the folks in Chase County are following my exploits.
your work is beautiful. odd that these journals didn’t let you know you were being featured, but glad I got to see your work.

New shop and new masks
After a long hiatus, I have posted some new masks for sale on Etsy, and with the demise of MakersMarket, I am trying out a new venue at ArtFire. Please have a look.
Wow. Fantastic. I have difficulties folding a piece of paper in half accurately. You must have the patience of a saint!
Thank you Hellen! I may or may not have saintly patience, but patience is not required when you enjoy what you do. Other people happily spend hours on diversions that would bore me to tears, but I’ve never been bored by a piece of paper.
Absolutely GORGEOUS work, Joel!

Pattern in Islamic Art
I just had to make a link here to what looks like an extraordinary resource: Pattern in Islamic Art. There are collected in one site thousands of images of Islamic decorative artwork from a variety of sources, all copyright free and available for download. You can search for architectural samples by region, illustrations  and diagrams from published works, historical samples from museum collections and more. Too much to see… an incredible resource.

I mean, just look at this:

or this:
And that’s just from a few minutes of browsing. There are pages and pages of this stuff.

go on, take a look… but make sure you have plenty of free time on your hands.
Wow, amazing! I’m shocked! Thanks for sharing your discovery.
Hi Joel,
Your artworks are amazing. I’m interested in using a photograph of one of your masks on the front of a catalogue of drama books, I’m trying to get in touch with you. My web address is http://www.piersaitman.co.uk. Could you get in touch please, whether you’re keen or not.
Cheers,
Piers
Update – I told Piers I was keen, and now take a look at the cover of the Methuen drama catalogue for 2010: http://www.exacteditions.com/exact/browse/478/1063/6622/1/1 . Looks good!
Thanks Piers!

Semi-annual update
I see the last post was in January, my how tempus fugits. That entry was an unabashed attempt to push my tawdry wares on Etsy, and whadda-ya-know, so is this one. Much of the collection had been travelling in the interim from one show to another, most recently to the art fair in Bellevue Washington last month.
From the end of last year until last month the Cooper collection has been floating around from one exhibiton to another: From Rhode Island (that’s my stuff way in the back (and thanks again Ray for those great 3D shots (for the uninitiated, you have to do that “Magic Eye” stare to see the 3D effect))) to Ohio to New York. There are still a few pieces in Spain for the upcoming exhibition in Zaragoza this fall – I wish I could be there in person (putting me in the unusual position of being jealous of my own origami, which seems to be more well-travelled than I am). But as I was saying, the season of exhibitions is (mostly) over and all of the touring pieces have (mostly) come home, and now they will be available for purchase by you, you lucky devil you.
But lest you think shameless self-promotion is my only reason for being here, I would also like to take this opportunity to promote the work of others (who just happen to be promoting my work too, but that’s beside the point).
This is Daniel’s version of the model:
As near as I can tell he’s got the design precisely right, without any input from me, mind you, he just looked at the pictures I posted of my own model and figured it out. He asked permission, of course, to post the CP he created. I heartily endorse this behavior since I am always pleased to see someone else folding my designs, but I just don’t like to create instructions for them. I don’t create diagrams or CPs and I don’t use them. So if someone else is willing to do that work, I’m all for it.
A while ago, another folder, Andrew Hudson, did a deconstruction of one of my masks and likewise created a CP of his efforts.
That’s my original on the left and Andrew’s reconstruction on the right. You can click through the picture to the Flickr page and find a link to the PDF of Andrew’s CP for this model. You may notice that the model here is not quite finished but I can tell that Andrew has figured out the folds. I have not yet seen any evidence that anyone has successfully folded a complete model, though. If anyone reading this feels emboldened by the challenge, why not go out and try to fold this baby for yourself.
And if anyone feels emboldened to do their own reverse engineering, may I suggest this model:
That’s a crease pattern I would surely like to see. I’ll give you a little hint to get started – get a really big piece of paper…
Hi joel, here sebastian arellano, a fan from mexico. Well, I tried to fold the mask andrew hudson cp-eated, and well, just wanted to share my poor result.
Hi Sebastian, nice to hear from you. I’m glad you gave the mask a try. For what it’s worth, the original has a pretty big nose too. I think you can get that feature under control by shaping around the mouth and eyes. I did the original in elephant hide paper, which might be a bit stiffer than the paper you used.
You do some good folding, by the way! I took a look around your Flickr – nice work!
not trying to be a jerk or anything, but just because you dont use cps dosent mean noone else wants them. i think you are trying to make sure noone tries to steal your ideas. im not saying thats bad, but you dont need to be so protective of your pieces. keep up the great work!
Oh, asterisk*.
I don’t make cps because I have no patience for making cps. It’s boring drudgery and I get no pleasure from it. I know that people would like to see crease patterns for my work and some of them have taken the initiative to reverse-engineer their own. Blue Paper on Flickr has done a few. Far from trying to keep people from “stealing my ideas” I love when people dig into those ideas to try and figure them out. I’m not a master origamist and I’m not a teacher. I know that tradition states that if you create origami you have some sort of obligation to teach it as well, but I just am not good at it. I just want to fold. Spending 20 hours folding a piece of paper only to take it apart again to spend another couple of hours tracing out all the creases for a cp is not fun. This may not be a very satisfying explanation for why I don’t make cps, and you seem to think I owe you something for some reason. You may not be “trying to be a jerk” but to suggest that I am withholding information that you want to see just because I don’t want anyone “to steal my ideas” – that I am that petty and small-minded is enormously insulting.
Such a beautiful fantastic work that you do!
Great talent!
I love origami, and you paper-folded pieces are just extremely amazing!
Stunning work! Would you be interested in doing work for hire? Or just a one-on-one talk? If so, please contact me. Thanks!
sorry! I didnt mean to be insulting. although you could draw the cp while folding the mask. even if it turns out to be a terrible mask, people would still appreciate it. once again, so sorry!!

Pet peeve
I hate packing peanuts!
Just thought I’d mention that. As some of you know, while folding occupies much of my time, it does not pay the rent. To that end, I have a regular job in the acquisitions department of a college library. This fulfills another consuming interest of mine – books. I get to spend the day surrounded by books! I get to open boxes of new books every day! Wheeee!
Except every now and then, like today for instance, some of those books come packaged in boxes filled with aerated puffs of styrofoam evil commonly known as “packing peanuts”. In the course of shipping, they get jostled around a bit within the box, rubbing against the books and each other, building up a charge of static electricity until upon their release from their cardboard confines they have become the clingiest, stickingest, annoyingest substance known to humankind. In this dry, winter weather, the static cling is nigh irresistable. These bits of hellish fluff will levitate from the box and chase you around the room like the Furies pursuing Orestes. They stick to the books and work their way between the pages. They infest. Do not ship with packing peanuts!
I feel better now.
I wish there was a “funny” button I could click…
Orestes, Pursued by the Furries
Snerk, for some obstinate reason I suddenly want to send you random, otherwise empty, boxes filled with peanuts, even though I know your pain.  I must be related to the Marquis in some unknown way.
You’re a real sweetheart, Christine!
I know, I know people marvel at the kindheartedness that I exhibit;P  It is a gift.  Meander on your path to masky perfection safe, knowing that today I didn’t send a box, but tomorrow…

Find me on Etsy
I’m not a very good blogger. I’ll admit that. Of course looking at my posts and the interval of time between them should make that obvious.
I like to fold. I’ve been developing my own techniques towards that purpose for something like six years now and I still manage surprise myself with what I can find in a simple piece of paper. Origami @tessellation is, after all, a niche within a niche and by all rights it should have exhausted itself by now. But I keep folding.
But I’m not that good at talking about what I do or how I do it. Folding the way I do has become as second nature as signing my own name. I don’t think about “reverse folds” and “rabbit ears” and “bird bases” when I fold and I don’t think any of those terms would apply anyway. I don’t know what words would apply.
So don’t count on a book of instructions or diagrams coming from me: it’s not that I’m trying to hide anything or that I am possessive of my designs. I just don’t know how to do that. I have great esteem for those who create and encourage others to create with them; artists who can teach. My friend Philip is a great example of this ideal. I wish I could do what he does.
People seem to like my origami, but I don’t think I’m much of an origamist. I’m just a struggling artist who stumbled onto an unusual way to get images out of my head and onto paper (or rather into paper). The creases I make are a meandering path into unknown territory, and the path is never the same the second time. If I could lead others down that path, or better yet, help them find their own, I would.
Speaking of meandering, all of this is merely poetical justification for the more prosaic purpose of shameless promotion. I don’t have instructions or diagrams but I do have the origami art itself. Once they are folded, I have no use for them, but hopefully someone else would. I try to make them look good, as I would with artwork of any other media, and  each piece is one of a kind. I have opened a shop on Etsy to sell the fruits of my paper-folding perambulations. You can still go to my Flickr site, of course, if you just want to see what I’m up to. But now their is a home for pieces you can have for your very own. Buy one, hang it on your wall, scrutinize it, take it apart and try to put it back together again. Help me finance my paper habit.
Your post has made me think a little bit about teaching, and learning, and what role we all play in this….
Philip has his own way of teaching– but you can still do what you’ve done all along: lead by example. And we need people that can lead by example, just as much as those that lead by lecture. By staying out of the teaching arena you force us to do what we should have been doing all along: to learn by figuring things out ourselves.
Joel – my wife and I stumbled across you and your masks a number of years ago on the Lawrence Art Walk. You were showing them for the first time in the library, and had maybe three on display. I went coo-coo for them and had to have one, told you that if you ever hooked up with the folding community they would eat your stuff up. In your fashion you expressed doubt that anyone would be that interested, and said you weren’t even that sure you wanted to sell the ones you’d done.
Well, I told you so. 😉
Hi, i’m Ada.
I’m a reporter from the Hong Kong free magazine,”Trends’on”.
Trends’on is a free media that focuses on art culture and art education.
We will be focusing on origami artist in the following issue (launches on 15/02).
We would like to try and let more people know about this subject, at the same time get more people to look at art/design differently.
We would like to ask you a few questions about yourself, your work and your thoughts on hair stylist, and the information might be featured in Trends’on.
Would you be able to help?
Thanks
Regards,
ada
http://trendson.com/
ada cheng
m: 6173 5113

FAQ part deux
More than one person has asked if I had ever gotten a papercut from folding. The people who ask this, I can only assume, have never folded paper before. No, I have never received a papercut from origami, and I don’t know anyone who has. I am reminded of this question which arose at the exhibition in Long Island, by an injury sustained today at work. I get papercuts all the time where I work at the library, I have three such cuts on my fingers right now: one above each thumbnail and one on the side of my left pinky finger. And no, although I work at the library, they weren’t from handling books. I work in acquisitions and the cuts came from opening boxes the books came in. Cardboard boxes have little pity for sensitive fingers.
I’ve been asked also if repetitive folding causes carpal tunnel syndrome. I suppose it could aggravate this condition if done improperly, but I find the stresses occur mostly in the fingers, not in the wrist. I get sore wrists the same way most office workers do, at the keyboard. I guess people like to imagine that the pursuit of art may be fraught with risk of physical harm – like papercuts and carpal tunnel syndrome. Origami is admittedly a rather tame art, one of the few that can be practiced on a bus ride or in the waiting room at a doctor’s office (ventriloquism and interpretive dance are others. Bronzecasting, stonecarving and pottery are not recommended). It requires little equipment beyond the medium itself (generally speaking, paper) and the digital appendages most were born with. And the origami muse seldom requires a blood offering from her supplicant.
These are occasionally asked questions (OAQ), back to the FAQ.
Q: Do you use special paper?
A: Yes and No. I use “elephant hide” – what is marketed in the U.S. as Wyndstone Marble – for almost all of my masks and many of my tessellations. I’ve been using it for maybe three years now and I’ve gotten rather comfortable with it. It has certain properties that I like: it is strong, flexible, creases sharply, responds well to wet-folding and it is pH-neutral. It’s not “special paper” though, at least not especially made for folding masks. It’s actually produced as endpaper and flyleaf stock for book manufacturers and for use in printing certificates and such. It just happens to work well for folding too. Any paper with similar characteristics will do. I’ve used banner paper and brown postal wrap which come in rolls and can be cut to any size. Wyndstone marble is becoming increasingly difficult to find in the States, however, and any alternative would be desirable. But when many people ask about “special paper”, they are looking at all the lines in the paper that I’m using making a tight triangular grid and they really want to know, is there special paper with those grids already in it. No, there isn’t. Those are creases and you gotta fold ’em yourself. Period.
Now you don’t have to fold tessellations from paper that has been prefolded with a grid, but for most tessellations, including the sort that I like to do, it sure makes things easier. It takes some time to fold a grid, but the investment is worth it later on. There are no satisfactory means I know of for making the grid mechanically: scoring damages the paper where it needs to be strong, impressing or embossing lines would only allow the paper to “hinge” in one direction, whereas a creased line can be reverse folded to make it neutral. But you don’t need a mechanical means anyway. Folding a grid is not all that bad. It takes time, sure. But it isn’t difficult and once you get the hang of it, it can be a restful, meditative activity. And it’s a good way to get to know your paper.
Q: You must be very patient
A: Again, that’s not a question, it’s an assumption.
It’s like many activities that people do for enjoyment: crosswords, jigsaw puzzles, knitting, and such. To someone who doesn’t share your interest, these things may seem tedious and boring. But if it’s something you enjoy, you do it. Patience is only necessary if you aren’t having fun. And if you’re not having fun, why are you doing it in the first place?
Liquid bandage: benzethonium chloride, collodion, acetone….oh, it’s the devil’s brew, but it will glue papercuts together like nobody’s business. As a paper-pushing office drudge, I swear by it.

FAQ
The aforementioned show at Stonybrook was an unusual experience for me. I have shown my work in exhibitions before, but this was the first time I had to be on hand for the entire show (The show was up for seven days, nine hours a day, it turned out to be a full time job). Fortunately, my wonderful wife was with me to offer moral support, fold some paper and field some of the questions that the attendees had. And there were a lot of questions.
The opening weekend coincided with the Origami Festival, with activities, classes and demonstrations for devotees of the folding arts. I didn’t have any time to check these activities out, as I was tied to the exhibition room for the duration. It was very busy. I’m sure many people that weekend were hoping to get mask-folding instruction from me. Simply folding the preliminary grid in a piece of paper can take hours, and the process of making a mask from that grid is more a matter of creative improvisation with by than step-by-step instruction. So the first most frequently asked question, “how do you do that”, doesn’t have a short, concise answer like: fold corner A to corner B, leaf-fold this bit, rabbit-ear that bit, etc…
It’s more like: “how do you compose an etude for piano”  – not to get all self-aggrandizing, but each mask I do is basically an individual composition, based on techniques that I’ve adapted and honed specifically for working with paper in this way. Paper is a sculptural medium and folding is my preferred method for manipulating it. It is not step-by-step and I don’t keep diagrams or instructions for what I do, I just do it.
Some other questions that came up at the show:
Q: “Are they each from a single piece of paper?”
A: Yes – by far the most frequently asked question, and the easiest one to answer (I wish they all were simple yes/no questions). But it is usually followed up with “…because some of them look like they’re woven…” which is not actually a question, but an observation, and an implied invitation for me to elaborate on the masks’ construction. So I elaborate. It’s a technique that is both structural and ornamental. Parallel folds make pleats that open up to form the convexities of the face and intersect with each other around the face. Where they intersect, twist folds are formed on the back of the piece which help to keep the pleats closed. The pleats get pretty tightly packed together, and where they run parallel to each other, the space between them looks like an individual strip of paper from the front. Where twist folds occur on the back, it appears that the “strips” of paper are crossing under and over one another.

The piece above uses a “basket-weave” technique. On the back you would see large, “open-backed” hexagonal twists alternating with triangular twists. On the front you see the spaces between the folds as strips, and where they appear to weave is actually a twist fold seen from the back. A weave such as this not only looks nice, but it keeps all those intersecting pleats organized and helps the mask hold its shape.
Q: “How long do they take you to do?”
A: Another simple question without a simple answer. As a side note, although I get this question a lot and I understand the reason for it, it still seems kind of an odd thing to ask. People seldom ask painters how long a piece took to paint, or poets how long it took to write a poem. It could be the Art versus Craft thing. Or the Hobby versus Occupation thing. Whatever it is, the masks are complicated objects and people like to know how long it takes to do something complicated. I would probably ask the same question to someone who makes a model ship in a bottle or builds a scale replica of the Eiffel Tower out of matchsticks. It’s a natural question.
The problem is, how to answer the question. Just considering the time it takes to fold a piece when I know exactly what to do and I have a piece of paper that has been prefolded into a grid, may be a matter of say four or five hours. But then the paper does have to be prefolded, and what about all the time spent figuring out each design? The trial and error, combining and discarding various elements: eyes, noses, mouths, to see which fit and how the folds interact. And all the models that went before, from which elements and techniques have been distilled to contribute to new pieces. Not to mention the treatment of the paper before and after folding: dying, stamping, painting, glazing, shellac, gum arabic, polyurethane, etc. which also goes through many trials and many errors. There is an evolutionary process by which the weaknesses of some pieces are culled and the more interesting bits extracted to be recombined with new ideas to form new masks, which are then distilled once again to make new designs. I’ve been doing these masks for about five years now, and you could say that the pieces I do now take about five years to make (By this token, you could also say that the pieces I did a year ago only took four years to make, which would seem to imply that either my models are getting more complicated or my skills are in decline). You can see a bit of the evolutionary process in some of my pieces from the last two years:
This was my first attempt at a bearded mask, but when I actually got to the beard, I was at a loss as to what to do. So I left the “beard” undefined and it became sort of a collar instead.
Here I’ve used almost exactly the same face but figured out one way to do a beard, a kind of twisty thing made of linked opened hex-twist variations, something I would come back to many times for a bit of texture.
I’ve carried over much of the beard design, as well as the nose and the mouth, although the mouth has been redesigned a bit to get a mustache which the above mask lacked. The eyes are different, I introduced a new approach to make them more defined and curvilinear.


I’ve taken the beard and the eyes from the previous mask with virtually no modification, but have changed the mouth to make it gape open and used a newly designed nose with flaring nostrils. The ornamental detailing at the top also defines the shape of the brow and forehead.
There are a lot of diversions and dead ends along the way, but there are certain features that demonstrate a direct line of descent, and the final piece, “Poseidon”, could not exist without the pieces that proceeded him. So while it may only take a few hours to fold him, knowing how to fold him took years and thousands of creases.
There are more questions to address, but I’ll have to get to them in future posts.
I like this very much.
When I was following you around at the 2006 OUSA convention, I was not infrequently asked these questions, because you were almost always answering the same questions for someone else. Me, not being as enamored of the the truth as some, I would just answer at random.  “Yes, Joel folds these masks, wearing only an empty soup can on his head — he positively worships Happy Hooligan — and it only takes him an hour or two. That doesn’t take into account the ritual purification….”
Oh, I had a lot of fun with these questions. The truth ain’t bad, neither.
Truth is for the unimaginative and the forgetful. I considered many possibilities when faced with these questions, but ultimately decided that I should adhere to the truth as much as possible, if only because my memory’s not good enough to keep my stories straight.
Hello Mr. Cooper
I would like to learn your technique. I think many people would find interesting a book from you.
Do you have in mind any future project like that?
Your work is so realistic and impressive!
Thanks!
I think I like Philip’s answers better and am probably more inclined to act that way than you are.
Hi Joel,
Your answers to the FAQ’s are really fine,
I also answer in a proper way.
Your work is really amazing
🙂
amazing Joe, you must be having oodles of patience to create such an work of art
Fabulous work, love it!

Back from Long Island
I’ve just returned from the Origami Heaven folding festival and exhibition at Stony Brook University in Long Island. This event took place at the beautiful Wang Center for Asian Studies.
I spent the last few months very busy preparing new pieces for not only this exhibition, but the OrigamiUSA convention which proceeded it just one month earlier. I’ve had too many shows in too short of a time and I’m looking forward to spending a day or two without folding anything at all. But I can’t rest for long. The fruits of all that finger flexing may be seen in this photo set on Flickr. If you go through the images, you might notice that they all have been captioned “this piece has been sold”. In fact, all but a very few items that I have done have been sold, donated, bartered, disassembled, destroyed or otherwise rendered unavailable to the general public. Which means I’ll have to make more stuff. I’ll probably create a set on Flickr to contain images of new pieces as I create them and while they are still available.
I didn’t expect all this attention when two and a half years ago I decided to post images of my foldings. But since then, I’ve started to treat these pieces, not merely as diversions and novelties, but as individual pieces of artwork. And why not? I’m doing the same thing I would have been doing in any other sculptural medium – metal, wood, ceramic, stone. There is no reason paper should be inferior to any of these.
See, once you start talking to strangers on the Internet, all sorts of strange things begin to happen and and you spend all your time wondering where the new normal is hiding.
I’ve long since given up on normal. Normal has nothing to teach.
Joel-This is a superb post and I am glad your work is getting noticed and appreciated.  You created something new, novel, and more importantly compelling.  This is a great explanation of the work you do and gives your pieces context (referring to the process of creation.)  Glad you were invited to Stony Brook and went.
I was referring to the several posts not just this one.
Thank you, Christine.

Recent activities
The time has flown by. I have been folding, but I have been delinquent in posting the results of my paper manipulations. I still have trouble showing work that is unfinished or not finished to my satisfaction. I’ve always been like that, which is why I worked in the dark, so to speak, for so long.
I have been struggling with grids on a horizontal alignment (which may not make sense to most people). Compare the grid underlying this recent mask:

with this older design:

Perhaps you can see that the one set of lines in the latter grid is parallel to the vertical axis of the face, and in the former, a set is perpendicular to the vertical. The grid is merely rotated 30 degrees, but the new orientation has many unexpected consequences on the way the face is formed. I have had to rethink almost all of the techniques for face shaping that I had developed on a vertical grid when working on a horizontal. And I’ve worn out a lot of paper trying, with few satisfactory results. But I think the challenge has kept me from getting stale.
That first mask, “Pharaoh”, by the way, will hopefully be arriving in Croatia soon, for an origami exhibition at the Krapina Gallery. They are showing origami this year as part of their annual Haiku Festival.
Many more pieces are currently on display closer to home (closer to my home anyway) at the county courthouse in beautiful downtown Lawrence, Kansas. Two walls in the treasurers office have been dedicated to the display of artwork by a different local artist every month. This month (May) is mine.
Here’s one wall:

and here’s the other:

More images of the individual pieces can be seen as a set on flickr.


Joel-Your diligence and search for the completed “product” is why you produce such beautiful art.  Most of us would never have the ability to focus for so long on a complex act that doesn’t yield results quickly or easily.  My dabbling in masks has led to even more awe at their construction and switching to a different orientation on the paper is really changing the aesthetic and improbing your repetore of masks.  While I am always curious about what you are doing I know I will always be fascinated by what you do post.
Wow Joel.  Great Job.
Lane Allen, “Origami Lane” Batavia IL (‘Origane’)
Send me an email so I can share my work with you. My web site is down.
Thanks

Ultimate auction
“Ultimate” as in “the last one” ….. probably.
While putting work up for sale on eBay has been a good way to make  it available to anyone who would like to obtain a “Joel Cooper Original”, and the lucky bidders who have done so seem to be happy with their acquisitions – I still prefer venues where the pieces can be seen, held, touched and thoroughly examined by as many people as possible. Art fairs, conventions, maybe even a gallery or two (although most galleries frown on patrons touching the artwork, which is really not fair at all)
That said, I’ve put one last mask on eBay for anyone who just has to have one-

I think it’s pretty special – it was originally folded in Brazil for the first International Origami Tessellation Exhibition there, itself a rather special event (in many ways). At about 37 cm. tall it’s the largest mask I’ve ever done or will likely ever do (I had to wrestle a 100 cm. piece of Wyndstone Marble to fold this thing – not fun). You can see, it has acquired a coat of shellac like the mask in Israel from an earlier post, which gives it some nice character, as well as strengthening and protecting the paper.
Pingback: The Fitful Flog » Mens regnum bona possidet
Dear Joel,
I’m especially coming to Houston this weekend to take your workshops at Tansu. I noticed that your recommend bringing our own grids. What size and type of paper would you recommend? I’m assuming we need to make a nice grid of equilateral triangles.
I can’t wait!
Adrienne
Adrienne –
  Well I didn’t see your comment before the workshop, but I’m glad you came. You did great! I hope you weren’t too frustrated by the end of it all, the advanced class got a little more advanced than I think anyone was really ready for. A @tessellation immersion program might be the best way to do it, if I thought I had the stamina for such a thing. But hopefully you’ll be interested enough by what you’ve learned so far to keep yourself immersed in @tessellation until the next time Jane and I can come to Texas.
Dear Mr. Cooper,
Do you think that you could do one of those workshops in southern Wisconsin? It would be great if you could!
Dear Joel,
my boyfriend is fascinated about origami..he’s got a birthday soon and i know that he’s dreaming about one of your mask.i would like to know if it is a posible to buy it? how much it cost?
Well Marta, the masks are available for purchase, while supplies last. But I’m afraid I’ve just about sold everything I had when I went to Houston so in the process of making more designs (which is why I haven’t posted lately, but I should have some new things to show soon). The masks take a long time to develop and are all one of a kind, so they generally go for around $300 a piece. If you really are interested, keep an eye on this blog and my flickr site to see what new masks pop up and you can contact me directly to see if they are available.

Origamijoel sells out
Well, that’s a bit harsh – I’m just trying to support my folding habit is all. So I’ve got a few things on eBay. If you’ve ever considered collecting some unusual, original artwork (great conversation pieces and you can be pretty sure your neighbors don’t have one already) put a bid in on one of these. This auction closes soon, so don’t dawdle.

Busy, busy, busy
Sending my children out into the great big world out there.
This world-weary fellow is currently residing in Israel, soon to be a part of an international origami exhibition at the Tikotin Museum in Haifa, due to begin this summer. Some information about the Museum of Japanese Art in Israel can be found here. Saadya Sternberg, the acting curator for the show, assures me that origamists of renown from all over the world will be participating, so if you should find yourself Haifa this summer, why not drop on by!
The piece is similar to earlier designs, more or less a cross between Moses and a mask I had simply named “Another Bearded Fellow”, apparently whilst in a funk of creative malaise. This new mask is distinguished by a coating of shellac, which is a treatment I’ve been experimenting with for a while, but only now have I started to get it right. It gives the piece a look of old varnished wood, and stiffens the paper and protects it from the elements as well.
This model may be easily recognized as a variation of the Triplet, with one face less. The original Triplet was inspired by a suggestion from Eric Gjerde and a three-faced sculpture he had seen. The two-faced variation, Gemini, was suggested by my better half, who has an aversion to odd numbers (the name, however, was my idea, so don’t blame her for that). It would seem I am highly suggestible. I should consider myself lucky that she didn’t suggest four faces to keep the number even (Mount Rushmore in paper? hmmmm….).
This mask is in Massachusetts right now, being prepared for inclusion in the Origami Now! show at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, beginning this summer. Take a look at their press release and you’ll see that lots of really wonderful artists will be represented there. Go check this one out, it should be a great show. I would go myself, but I have still more irons in the fire.
In addition to this year’s Origami USA convention in New York, which I hope against hope to be able to attend – so many good friends to see there – I’ll be helping out with the local Islamic Society of Lawrence’s youth camp for a day, elaborating on the influence of traditional Islamic arts in the seemingly disparate art of origami, re: @tessellations. But mostly I’ll be showing little ones how to fold paper and have fun.
And I’ve been invited to participate in the annual Origami Festival at Tansu in Houston, which looks to be a great time for all, with demonstrations, workshops and all that. It is also a charitable event for the Sunshine Kids Foundation, a Houston based organization providing positive activities for children undergoing cancer treatment. The kids will be at the festival and they will be folding. Should be a blast!
Hey, you are quite the busy guy these days! Sounds like some great stuff going on!
Congrats on the showing at the Peabody, that’s a wonderful museum, and they do origami right from what I hear.
Hoping you can make it to NYC, it sounds like a fair-sized gathering of tessellators, corrugators, and otherwise abstract folders will be present. You’ll have to beat off the fan-boys with a stick! 🙂
Magnifique!

Nibelung

It began as something else (as is often the case – see previous post), but as folding progressed, a distinct character other than that intended began to emerge. To me, it looks like an ill-tempered dwarf, perhaps one who’s magic ring has just been stolen by some Rhenish pipsqueak with a fancy sword. I could call this one “Alberich”-  or I could go with another surly dwarf in another story about a magic ring, and call him “Gimli”. I wouldn’t want anyone to think I would actually sit through fifteen hours of Wagnerian bombast to get my inspiration, so maybe I’ll go with Gimli on this one.

Shrewd observers might notice the similarities in this design to the previous post, “Mephistopheles”, especially around the mouth and mustache.  Gimli here did evolve directly from Meffy, which was done primarily as a beard study to solve some technical challenges with integrating a full beard with a simple mouth.  A lot of pleats to coordinate; the origamic equivalent of corraling cats. I try to make it seem as if I am completely in control of the paper when I fold these things, but that is not at all the case. Just making a nose or an eye is easy. Much of the work in designing these things is figuring out how in heck do you get all folds that come from these seperate elements to work together when you put a nose and two eyes and a mouth, etc., in close proximity to each other. At some point, I’m not telling the paper what to do anymore – it’s telling me. But that’s really the fun part. I’m not the only creator involved; the paper is there too, and when it works, it works because we are working together. That’s fun!
Further beard studies along the same basic design as Gimli led to his close cousin, whom I have called the “Green Man”.
Although it has been suggested (Thank you, Christiane), and it is consistent with the unofficial Tolkien theme herein, that he may be an Ent. I don’t know the names of any Ents, so I still don’t know what to call him (I’ll confess that I’ve never read Lord of the Rings – while I’m at it, I’ll confess that I’ve never sat for more than a few minutes of the Nibelungenlied either, but that doesn’t stop me from naming the other mask “Alberich”, as if I know what the heck I’m talking about).
The eyes, nose and mustache are basically the same, but I’ve called in a @tessellation pattern of hex twists and opened iso-hex twists to act as beard. Don’t worry if the above description makes no sense, I don’t know any good descriptive terms for the techniques used to make that tessellation; that may have to be the subject for a future tutorial on this blog.
The Green Man, by the way, is currently on the virtual auction block at eBay. Do a search for “origami mask” and you’ll find it. You’ll also find a little glassine mask, images of which may be seen on my Flickr site as well. Keep watching eBay and you will find more of my pieces becoming available in the near future. I had been preparing in the last couple of months for a local annual art show, which last year provided an unexpected but very timely source of exposure and income. This year’s show was cancelled due to thunderstorms (an outdoor event in Kansas, in May, and no provisions for inclement weather – go figure). Oh, well. The northeast Kansas origami artwork collectors’ loss (a niche market, to be sure) is the world wide origami artwork collectors’ gain (you could say that I’m bumping it up a niche). The pieces that I prepared for sale locally (complete with protective polyurethane coating against the possibility of rain) will be made available globally. Long live the internet!
I just read an article on your masks that will be in the Heights here in Houston.  I’m out of town so will not be able to visit – I am so disappointed.  I’m fascinated by your work.  I’ve long collected theatre masks which are in varied materials from leather to fabric to feathers and combinations of all.  I’ve never seen work like yours and admire it.  Is Tansu here going to carry more of your work or is there another place to see them personally?  Thanks
Unfortunately, I do not at present have a regular venue for showing my work in person. All of my current work has gone to Tansu and all of the masks have already sold there, but a large number of flat tessellations are still there and as of this date still available and you can see them there anytime. The Origami Festival went wonderfully well, and Tansu is a great place – Van and I are talking about the possibility that I might send new pieces to Tansu after the festival (as soon as I get some new pices finished) as a regular venue for displaying and selling my work.

mask in progress – Mephistopheles

This is a mask that I’m working on currently. I usually don’t post works in progress, but I thought I would record this one for posterity, as I think there are some interesting and new things going on in it’s developement, and the way I work, they may be lost forever in the final product. So this stage has been recorded for posterity.
I was otiginally trying to do something quite different, another bearded gentlemen – Zeus – but as I worked the mouth and beard, a smile appeared (in the mask, that is). My Zeus was supposed to be grimacing menacingly, but this fellow was smiling, and I could do nothing to wipe that self-satisfied smirk from his face; so I went with it.
The rest of the mask took shape of it’s own volition and the mighty Zeus faded away as the impish Pan took his place. Or if you prefer – Mephistopheles.
Humorous…I’ve been looking for red elephant’s hide because I wanted to do a mask of the prince of darkness.  I’ve downloaded several reference images.  Although I am getting ahead of myself since I havn’t made a satisfactory mask yet.
Your mask has a rakish quality that makes me think of a debauched French Lord.
Once that smile appeared in the paper, I had no doubts who it belonged to. I always thought of the dark one as a bit of a rake.
Have you had any satisfactory results with dyeing elephant hide? I’ve used alcohol based inks, such as are used for stamp pads, and spread them with alcohol in a spray bottle. The alcohol doesn’t distort the paper as much as water would, and it dries faster. You might be able to get good results diluting food coloring with water before applying, or perhaps wetting the paper before administering the dye.
Who would not be proficient in this art?
How pliant is this Mephistopheles,
Full of obedience and humility!
Such is the force of magic and thy spells.
I’ve had ok results dyeing elephant’s hide.  It does fade and come off on the fingers.  My main problem is space.  I have no room that can be closed off from the cat.  To get a decent color I used the food coloring at full concentration.  It used a bottle for the one side of the paper.  I probably will leave the paper mods till I have got a face I can deal with.  The mask thing is frustrating.  I got a nose I liked, but now the mouth and cheeks I am having trouble shaping.
Have fun with your debauched Lord.  He looks like he’d be fun to hang out with;)
It took me a lot of time and experimentation to get features that I liked for the masks. Like you, I would get a nose that I liked, but nothing else. Then maybe I would get a good mouth, but it wouldn’t fit with the good nose. I just worked them out bit by bit.
quede fascinado con tus mascaras como podriamos hacer para que me enseñaras a hacerlas mi mail es davinci_leonar2@hotmail.com
very Inspiring!
Hi! Great mask! I’m an opera singer that just got cast to do my first Meph in Gounods Faust and was looking for some character source material images. I realize this is an old post but did you ever finish the mask? If so do you have any pics of it? I’d love to see them!
Thanks
Congratulations – there’s a juicy role!
Alas, this Mephistopheles is no more. It has been “recycled”. But looking back at this old picture, I see some interesting things that I might want to try again. There may be another Mephistopheles in the future.

Swirly tessellation


This “swirly” tessellation was created a while back as an adaptation of Tomoko Fuse’s swirly square tessellation (seen here folded by Melisande) applied to a hexagon and triangle @tessellation pattern

Begin with a regular hexagonal twist, but use pleats three creases wide – resist the urge to make a three crease wide hexagon, keep the little hexagon sitting on top – twist that little hexagon back in the direction opposite to the way the big pleats want to go, and then begin to collapse the whole thing into a sort of star shape. Notice in the second picture where the twisting begins to reverse direction at the base of the forming star.

When the star has collapsed, begin to twist the hexagon on top back again to form the swirls. This is a pretty messy move, but I don’t know any better way to do it. Start with one pleat, fold it back, move to the next exposed pleat, fold it back, and work your way around the hexagon until you have enough slack to twist it and lay it flat (the pleats themselves will not lay flat).

The tessellation contiues by “splitting”or bifurcating the pleats that leave the hex swirl to make triangular twists all around it. Remember, the pleats are three creases wide, so they should be split into two pleats that are also three creases wide. Notice where the splits occur. The triangle twists are done similarly to the swirled hexagonal twists; the twists are not collapsed as simple triangles, but as triangular stars with a smaller triangle on top. The little triangle on top is then twisted back, just as the hexagons were, to make the swirls.
Each pleat around the central hexagon is split with a triangle swirl, and then new hexagon swirls can be formed where the new pleats intersect to make a complete tessellation pattern.
The original images for this tutorial can be seen here. Pictures on flickr can be viewed larger than they are presented here.
You
Are
Epic
That is all.
That back twist is impossible if you keep twisting until the bottom closes. Lost a 48-crease hexagon to that mistake.
A question: any tips on getting very precise crease intersections? I could use some help there.
I’m not sure exactly what you did, but the hexagonal twist is closed on the bottom, if that is what you are referring to. It is a compound twist; the triple wide pleats are collapsed into a double wide hex twist and a counter-rotating single wide hex on top but both twists are closed. But perhaps you’re referring to something else.
When folding a grid, I divide the paper just a few times in one direction and the same amount in a second direction and then dividing in the third direction, I am very careful that the creases intersect exactly. If the first set of intersections line up as they should, then you only need to continue dividing the spaces in half exactly and all succeeding creases will intersect as well.
My mistake was that I tried to accomplish the swirl in one single hexagon twist, and of course the paper will not twist that far without the use of a compound twist, as you mentioned. While I was trying to figure this out, I stumbled upon Yureiko’s solution to this compound twist (which can be found in her Flickr page, here: http://www.flickr.com/photos/24776310@N04/2862277310/sizes/o/in/photostream/), and it works fine.
Also, while I was getting there, I managed to accomplish the compound twist in a way that, oddly, I can’t seem to reproduce: the single hexagon twist sits atop another single hexagon twist, which results in the “arms” of the helix being only two pleats wide. I put a photo comparing both swirls in my Origami album in Facebook, here: https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=500521063296694&set=a.471958666152934.124779.100000164152883&type=3&theater.
Thank you very much for the precision tips. I’ll definitely try them out. I’ve been getting a little better with each tesselation, and your method will surely accelerate my progress.
Have a great weekend!
Ruy
Greatt read thanks

Tutorial of “flagstone” @tessellation basics
It begins with an open-backed hex-twist (if you don’t know how to make an open-backed hex twist… well…. learn how) – bifurcate of the pleats on the back to produce a triangle twist as close to the hex twist as you can
 begin to split the next pleat (it starts to get tricky, and the paper will not lay flat, it will even try to resist your efforts at this point) to begin to form another open-backed hex twist on the other side
continue the process going from on side of the paper to the other, splitting pleats to make triangle twists and adding pleats to make hex twists
and there ya go
Brilliant — and clear. Even an old untessellate like me can grasp it.
Thank you, Philip. I occasionally approach brilliance, less often clarity, but very rarely both at the same time.
Pingback: The Fitful Flog » New Kid in Town
Hi Joel,
i always like your works. im happy when i heard you started a blog!
good tutorial. hope for more in future =)
Clearly tutorial. Thanks Joel!
Welcome to WordPress 😉
Pingback: Polymer Clay Notes » origami joel
Thanks a lot, I’ve tried it right now and it works! 🙂
I’m glad it helped!
i like it, thanks you

Little face

A fragment of a small mask folded from a single piece of baking parchment. No cuts or glue were used.
hello mr. joel i’m an artist off paper too, but i’m from Colombia, Bogota, i’m intrested in know how you do this magnific mask. Would you send me the pattern crease,please.
thank you.
Diego Andres gomez
Hi, Diego – I’m afraid there aren’t any crease patterns or diagrams available for my masks. They are created not so much by following a pattern, but by following a technique, so I don’t even know how useful a crease pattern would be. I do hope to post some tutorials on aspects of the technique and the creation of some of the elements and features of the masks as time allows. So all I can say at this point is keep checking, and hopefully something useful will come along.
If you are going to do that why haven’t you yet?
Just wondering.
me gusto la mascara (litle face)soy de argentina podrias mandarme los diagramas para hacerla desde ya muchas gracias

Greetings
I have a blog.
I’m a paper artist – most of my work can be seen on Flickr at the moment, here.
Congratulations for your new blog, Joel !
In case it isn’t a kind of “journal intime”, I suggest you make some advertizement about it ; a link on your flickr profil page, for example.
I ‘m here because Philip mentionned it, otherwise not.
Hi Joel, welcome to the blogsphere, nice to see some written things from you 🙂
Congratulations, Joel! ^L^”
i just found out your blog from the fitful flog.
Your work is extraordinary!!!!

