Qulu Box
This box is the second design in the Zulu family. Instead of just triangles, the center of the molecule contains a square surrounded by trapezoids. The molecule is a flagstone and can be tessellated.

Radiant Tessellation
A pattern of hexagons, rectangles, and triangles, folded from a hex grid. In order to make the model more interesting, I skipped some molecules, which results in an outline resembling a drop of water or the head of a fireball/comet.

Triangles from Red Khepera
Triangles, 16×16 grid, folded from red Khepera paper.

Star a la Fujimoto III (recursive)
A recursive variant of Star a la Fujimoto III. Of course, even more levels can be folded, but only the outer layer will have a color change.

Quartered Box
A very simple box whose lid is divided into four identical squares. It is basically the back side of a single molecule of
Four-Sink Base Tessellation plus walls.

Lucky Star Fractal from Green Tant
Lucky Star Fractal, level 3, folded from dark green Tant paper.
This model is so nice I’ve folded it probably dozens of times (which rarely happens) and each time gives me a new perspective.

Four-Sink Base Tessellation (Diagonal)
I folded this tessellation for a collaboration with the late Meenakshi Mukerji. I would fold some simple tessellation bases on which her designs were based and send them to her so that she could then fold the final steps. Since I folded a few of those bases, I experimented with grid rotation, margins, and margin decoration. Here, the grid is diagonally (45°) rotated, with 48 divisions, and there are 3 units of margin, which allows for nice decoration along the edges and in the corners.

Negative Space Stars
A simple tessellation on a square grid. Stars appear in the negative space as “holes” in the upper layer of paper while the pattern of the upper layer consists of pairs of house-shaped pentagons (or hexagons if you treat each pair as a single shape).

Hex Twist Star (CFW 422 applied to CFW 84)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto demonstrates a general technique which I labeled CFW 422. Here, it is combined with the simplest of Fujimoto’s basic stars, Windmill (CFW 84).
CFW 422 is not found in any of Fujimoto’s books (at least not that I’m aware of), but I found a model folded this way among
Fujimoto’s models in my possession. It was the exact design you see here (combined with CFW 84).
While I haven’t seen physical models or information in any books about combining this technique with other stars in the center, it is so obvious you can do it that I assumed Fujimoto must have known it. Therefore, I assigned the CFW number to the technique rather than a specific model. Note that this is inconsistent with my approach of assigning a separate CFW number to each specific combination of rays and center for most stars.
Since I only have a physical model folded by Fujimoto, there are no instructions and I had to reverse-engineer the design. Fortunately, it is very simple and consists of just folding a star normally made from 6×6×6 grid from an 8×8×8 grid and adding a kind of swivel fold on the back in order to make the ray narrower.

Woven Triangles Tessellation IX
A full tessellation of the pattern found on Box with Woven Triangles IX, folded from
Vintage Paper.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 114)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto is only mentioned in textual form: there isn’t even a picture in Fujimoto’s books. It consists of the molecule of Hemp Leaf (CFW 88) surrounded by the rays taken from
CFW 110.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 123)
This star is like Petals (CFW 85) but with more paper around the tessellation molecule.

Box with Woven Triangles XXII
Derived from Box with Woven Triangles IX by changing the layer ordering.

Sidewalk
I called this tessellation sidewalk because this flagstone pattern is often used on sidewalks where I live. The design is basically
Momotani’s Wall, stretched in one direction in order for the bricks to become square rather than rectangular. I used pouncing paper (Italian: carta spolvero) I bought at an art store in Italy during my trip to
CDO convention in 2018, so given I folded the model in 2023, the paper waited 5 years for its turn.

Lux Aeterna
This model is dedicated to the memory of Artur Biernacki, a Polish origami designer who died unexpectedly exactly a year ago, on June 8th, 2023. May light eternal shine upon him.
Folded from a unique sheet of hand-made paper of cotton, flax, and silk, made by John Gerard Paperworks.

Quicksands Box
The tessellation molecule that decorates this box spent several years in my drawer before I finally made a clean fold, since I designed it shortly after
Dune Tessellation, meaning 2017 or 2018. Angelika Schwengers recently posted pictures of her design called
3D-twisted-triangle tessellation which looks very similar but has a different structure. Her picture mentioned in the previous sentence also shows Triple Triangle Twist Tessellation by Benjamin Parker which again is based on similar design ideas.

Fractalized CFW 85 (consistent fold direction)
I developed Shuzo Fujimoto’s design, Petals (CFW 85) into a fractal.
I don’t have direct proof if Fujimoto was aware of this possibility, but I think it’s likely.
At each level of the fractal, one can fold the pleats either in the same direction as in the level before, or reverse it. The model shown here is the one with consistent fold direction. The same design was made independently by Evan Zodl
(link) and Zander Land
(link to claim), possibly others as well. I also folded a version where the direction alternates at each level.
Just like the regular Petals (CFW 85), this star is actually a tessellation molecule and can be folded in a multi-molecule arrangement.

Fractalized CFW 85 (alternating fold direction)
I developed Shuzo Fujimoto’s design, Petals (CFW 85) into a fractal.
I don’t have direct proof if Fujimoto was aware of this possibility, but I think it’s likely.
At each level of the fractal, one can fold the pleats either in the same direction as in the level before, or reverse it. The model shown here is the one with alternating fold direction. The same design was achieved independently by Edward Mistretta
(link) and Andrew Hudson (link), possibly others as well. I also folded a version where the direction is consistent at each level.
Just like the regular Petals (CFW 85), this star is actually a tessellation molecule and can be folded in a multi-molecule arrangement.
Folded from rare pale blue Elephant Hide paper.

Tessellated Petals (CFW 85)
Many of Shuzo Fujimoto’s stars are built around tessellation molecules, and thus can, with a simple transformation, be tessellated. For some cases I was able to find direct evidence that Fujimoto did fold the tessellated version, but for others, including this model derived from his star Petals (CFW 85), I was not. Still, if I was able to come up with the tessellated version, it is quite likely, even if not certain, that so was Fujimoto himself. I’m also pretty sure I have seen this molecule being used by others in their tessellations.
Model folded from a sheet of decorated Washi I received courtesy of Satoko Saito. I almost ruined the sheet when I decided to iron it and melted the glue holding the gold and silver streaks — you can see they are now surrounded by ugly borders.

Hydrangea Plaque (CFW 49)
Another variant of the Hydrangea by Shuzo Fujimoto, this one using a color change around the edges.

Armor-Piercing
A bullet in flight, penetrating a sheet of armor.

Zulu Box
This box is decorated with a tessellation molecule that I called “Zulu” since the square with two diagonals resembles the maritime “Z” (Zulu) flag.
Several patterns can be derived from it, and I plan to publish pictures of other molecules in the family soon.

Box with Braided Pinwheel Tessellation (variant C) molecule
This is a simple box decorated with a molecule of Braided Pinwheel Tessellation variant C. It was one of my experiments with folding window blind fabric and you can clearly see the fabric’s texture in these close-up pictures (the sheet was quite small, and so is the folded box).

Sol (Kaiser/Stark paper)
Another clean fold of Sol, this time from Kaiser/Stark paper.

Woven Square Tessellation
It took me about five years after folding the Woven Square Box to fold a tessellation with multiple molecules used on the box. This model differs from Square Interlace Tessellation by just one fold: in the last step, there is a simple valley fold instead of a reverse fold. This small modification changes the look of the tessellation quite a bit. The valley fold has the tendency to unfold (can you spot it in the picture?), so either use paper with very good memory, or resort to wet folding or ironing to keep the folds in place.

Star a la Fujimoto II
Another model using my Color-Wrap Rays technique together with Shuzo Fujimoto’s
Scissors (CFW 87) molecule.

Box with Woven Triangles XXI
Another box with a tessellation molecule from the Woven Triangles family. The triangles are visible in deep layers of the model, surrounded by a flat frame.

Iso-Area Stars (CFW 291)
This translucent design by Shuzo Fujimoto would be called an iso-area tessellation in modern parlance since both sides sport the same pattern (except for being mirrored). It looks most impressive in back-light.

Box with Woven Triangles XX
In this variant of Woven Triangles, the triangles are hidden in deeper layers of the molecule and surrounded by flat rectangular panels.

David (דוד)
I designed and folded this model in mid-2023. Originally, I planned it as a typical figurative illustration of the story of David and Goliath, often found in art: David holding the severed head of Goliath, or standing over his dead body. Gradually, my concept shifted more and more towards the abstract, until I settled on just David’s name, spelled out in Hebrew (דוד). A name seems to be the ultimate abstract representation, and is especially fitting due to the symbolic significance names carry in Jewish tradition.
February 24th, 2024, marks the second anniversary of the full Russian invasion of Ukraine, which I found a suitable date for publishing this work.

Propellers (CFW 54)
Propellers Tessellation was one of my first successful designs. Interestingly, I came up with it later than with Square Interlace Tessellation even though Propellers is one of the intermediate steps when folding Square Interlace.
Several years later, I learned that Shuzo Fujimoto had designed Propellers many years before me. I found this model in the package of Fujimoto’s models received from Roberto Morassi, combined in a single tessellation with molecules of Stars and Squares, another design I independently invented years after Fujimoto. I then identified this molecule in one of the images of his books: it appears as one of the molecules used in CFW 262 whose back-lit image can be found on page 163 of Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami. This molecule is also used in the center of
Fujimoto’s Square Twist Star (CFW 150).

Origami Deutschland Box
This box represents the logo of Origami Deutschland, the German Origami Society. I designed this model in the evening after the last day of the 2023 German convention. Technically, it’s just a
Crossed Box Pleat (CBP) (which can also be seen as the back side of a level-1
Hydrangea), with one corner folded down.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 92)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto is one of his simple hex twist modifications that are also used as building blocks of his more complex designs. I find this one very elegant.

Barnacles
The name of this corrugation comes from the sessile sea organisms it resembles.

Square Interlace Tessellation with Curled Corners
You can make your tessellations more interesting by warping them into various shapes using wet folding.
This Square Interlace Tessellation with curled corners is just one example of how you can alter a tessellation with flat molecules. The general technique was the subject of one of my workshops at
Outdoor Origami Meeting 2023.

Heading into 2024
Per my personal tradition of designing a New Year’s model each year, here’s one for 2024. This is my first origami design folded from Dragon Hide paper (copper color). I hope to write a longer review some time: first impression was surprisingly good.
Belated happy New Year 2024 to everyone!

Handle with Scissors (CFW 136)
Another star by Shuzo Fujimoto which is not even depicted in his books, just mentioned in text. It uses rays from
Handle (CFW 133), but the tessellation molecule in the center is that of
Scissors (CFW 87).

Windmill (CFW 84)
This is probably the simplest among Shuzo Fujimoto’s stars derived from decorated hex twists. Fujimoto usually listed it as the first decorated variant, right after Basic Form of Twist Origami (CFW 83), which is just a bare hex twist. Since it is the simplest, he often used it to demonstrate more general ideas that can be applied to other such modified twists as well. Often, he just showed the variant of a model using CFW 84 as a component, and only mentioned (or assumed readers would come up with it) the possibility of using other decorations in its place. In this vein, pretty much everywhere the only variant of Handle (CFW 133) shown or mentioned is the one with the Windmill in the middle, but Twist Origami I contains pictures of other variants as well. Dahlia (CFW 144) goes even further, and variants using different molecules in the center are not even shown in drawings, but only mentioned in text. Technically, pretty much anywhere a Windmill (CFW 84) molecule can be folded, other simple modifications of the hex twist, can be folded as well.

Hemp Leaf (CFW 88)
Another simple modification of a hex twist by Shuzo Fujimoto.
When used as a tessellation molecule, this design has later been rediscovered by multiple people, including yours truly.
The name hemp leaf (asanoha, 麻の葉) refers to a Japanese pattern used on fabrics, which this origami design resembles. Thanks to
Tamaki/タマキ (aosoraorigami@instagram) who pointed this out to me. Thus, the model is not a very realistic depiction of the actual plant leaf, but a pretty exact depiction of the abstract pattern named after it.

Box with Framed Pyramid
This design is derived from Box with Alien Pyramid by rearranging paper layers. While the latter molecule tends to rise up from the plane and become 3D, this one stays flat and looks as if surrounded by a frame. Just like the Alien Pyramid, the Framed Pyramid can be tessellated and is in its essence just a few modified open-back square twists.

Box with Alien Pyramid
The decoration on this box consists of just a few modified open-back square twists. It resembles a flat-topped pyramid such as found in Mesoamerican architecture or Sumerian ziggurats. Twisted walls make it look a little alien, though. This pattern can be tessellated. By rearranging the layers, this design can be transformed into the Box with Framed Pyramid.

Holly (variant D)
This variant of Holly changes the appearance of the pleats in the background of the molecule. Rotating the model 45° makes it look more like a decorated cross (this works for other variants of Holly as well). I folded this model from a sheet of thick hand-made paper from John Gerard paperworks that I cut out from an envelope in which his other paper samples were packaged (such samples have been given to participants of the
German Origami Convention for the last few years).

Handle with Thorn (CFW 135)
This star uses the same rays as Handle (CFW 133), but the tessellation molecule in the center is that of
Thorn (CFW 86).

Translucent Design (CFW 58) from Pergamenata Paper
The first time I folded this tessellation, I used non-transparent paper, which made it look great in reflected light, but allowed little in terms of viewing it as a “translucent design”. Now, I refolded it in Fedrigoni Pergamenata Bianco 110 gsm, which I think
I can call a type of tracing paper, but one that does not break after precreasing. The back-lit view is stunning indeed.
This time, I did not precrease anything other than the hex grid (32×32×32). The molecules are built from modified triangle twists, and base triangle twists
I could fold directly without precreasing, which made the process much faster.

Star with Unicursal Hexagram
This star is decorated with a molecule of my Unicursal Hexagram Tessellation. The color-change rays are the same as in Star a la Fujimoto.

Sol with Color-Change Background
A modification of my Sol, adding a color-change background to the tessellation molecule. The gold-blue Washi looks in real life even better than in the picture, but unfortunately wasn’t very strong and started tearing at a few points where lots of creases cross.

7-Box
The digit “7” on this box’s lid is a tessellation molecule, derived from the one on Z-Box. Hiding one of the horizontal bars sounded like a simple enough exercise, but proved to be more difficult than I expected. Still, the end result is pretty neat, and rotated upside-down, the character can also double as the letter “L”.
The Kouzo-Bokashi Four Seasons washi I used looks beautiful, but was too thin for a box, making the finished model rather fragile.

Well III
Third design in my Well series. The layout looks the same as Well I at first glance, but the central square is placed at a deeper level than all the rectangles that surround it. If not for this central space, the model would be a flagstone tessellation. Back side is a flagstone pattern, with a larger square in the center.

Square Spaceness
I folded this classic design by Alessandra Lamio during a workshop with her at the
2018 Outdoor Origami Meeting. Now it hangs on my wall, framed. The molecule has quite deep relief, and this 3D look sets it apart from many other designs. There is also Triangular Spaceness, but I haven’t folded that one so far.

Petals (CFW 85)
This super-simple star by Shuzo Fujimoto still looks great when folded from nice paper, in this case red Kouzo-Bokashi
Four Seasons washi. This is one of Fujimoto’s simple stars which consist of just a tessellation molecule with no extra paper around it. Since it is a modified hex twist, the molecule needs additional connecting triangle twists in order to be tessellated.

Framed Heart (variant B)
This is variant B of my Framed Heart. Just like the original, it consists of a tessellation molecule placed inside a frame folded from the same sheet of paper. Variant B differs from variant A in that it is more paper effective: the heart itself only uses a 14×12 grid rather than 14×14. Another improvement is having just one horizontal hidden pleat instead of two and thus a cleaner background.
These improvements come at a price, however. While using a little less paper may be an advantage when folding a big tessellation, when folding a single molecule inside a symmetric frame, using a grid of same width and height makes folding from a square simple. When the molecule uses a non-square area of the sheet, excess paper needs to be hidden behind the frame, so simply using it for the molecule would have been more convenient. Another problem with this variant is that using less paper causes the heart to be locked to the background much stronger than in variant A. This means that it is not possible to shape this heart to make it look as round as is possible with variant A since the vertices of the heart are attached to the background.
Nonetheless, this variant is interesting too, and in some cases its better paper efficiency is useful indeed, as was the case when I used this molecule as decoration for a modular origami cube and the two grid units gained in one direction were exactly the amount of paper I needed to create small tabs necessary for connecting the units.

Handle with Hemp Leaf (CFW 137)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto uses the same rays as his Handle (CFW 133) but the tessellation molecule is that of Hemp Leaf (CFW 88), same as independently created by me and others in
Lucky Star Tessellation. CFW 137 is one of those models that do not even have a picture of the finished model in Fujimoto’s books: it is only mentioned in one sentence as the possibility of combining CFW 133 and CFW 88 in the above-mentioned way.

Triangles Flagstone
This design is a modification of Triangles so that the tessellation becomes flagstone. At first glance, this change is more visible on the back side than on the front. Folded from a sheet of handmade paper from John Gerard paper studio.

Frog Star
The outline of this star is made using the same technique as various Star a la Fujimoto variants.
The decoration in the center is a tessellation molecule that looks like a frog. In a multi-molecule model, you can rotate each frog individually. You can also use a different kind of outer edge to make other frog stars. Other four-legged animals are also possible, for example a turtle. I found this duo-color
Kami with a flower pattern on one side fitting for this model, even though I only use paper with such patterns rarely.

Skeleton (4) (CFW 234)
This is one of Shuzo Fujimoto’s designs that include the word skeleton in their names. They are corrugations, aligned into 3D structures that look like intersecting planar fragments. The number 4 in this model’s case comes from the fact that it has 4 sides when seen from above.
Another name (originally in English) that appears in Fujimoto’s books is Skeleton Complex (4) with a square. The last grid row at the end of the model can be left open, forming a kind of box, folded down to form a flat surfaced, or used to connect multiple models into a longer assembly. It is, of course, also possible to extend the model by folding it from a rectangle instead of a square.

Unicursal Hexagram Tessellation
The molecule of this tessellation is made from a modified hex twist and represents a unicursal hexagram which is an interesting geometric shape that has also been used as a magical symbol. Unicursal means the outline can be traced with a single stroke without lifting the pen. In contrast to many modifications of hex twists, such as those found in Fujimoto’s stars (most of which are also tessellation molecules), this one has only two-fold rather than six-fold rotational symmetry.

Scissors (CFW 87) from Woodstock Paper
A better fold of Shuzo Fujimoto’s star Scissors (CFW 87), from a larger sheet. Front and back have the same outline, but the number and arrangement of paper layers is a bit different.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 106)
This star consists of a CFW 91 molecule folded in the center of a hexagon with 6×6×6 grid, giving it additional rays around the molecule. This work is folded from plain-color Tant paper in order to fully show the model’s structure.
I also made a fold from patterned Washi paper that you can compare. Also, see both folds side by side.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 106) from patterned Washi
This was my first clean fold of Shuzo Fujimoto’s CFW 106 star, from a sheet of printed Washi
I received courtesy of Satoko Saito for the Year of the Ox. Unfortunately, the patterned paper, while beautiful, hid the structure of the model from view, so later I folded the same design from plain paper.
Also, see both folds side by side.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 106) comparison of patterned Washi and Tant folds
A comparison of two folds of CFW 106 side by side: one from patterned Washi and the other from plain color Tant. Patterned paper, though very nice, made it impossible to see the model’s structure.

Fractalized CFW 91
I found out that Shuzo Fujimoto’s molecule used in his CFW 91 star, can be changed into a fractal. By pulling some paper outside in the center, you can get a small hexagon from which a smaller copy of the original star can be folded, and the process can continue for as many times as the paper and folding precision allow. Just like the plain star (which can be considered a level-1 fractal), versions with more levels can be tessellated.
I’m not sure if Fujimoto was aware of this possibility: on one hand, I haven’t found it published in any of his books, but on the other, he did publish the design I call Lucky Star Fractal which is based on a similar idea, and if I noticed the possibility of fractalizing CFW 91, so may have Fujimoto himself.

Tessellation (CFW 335)
This tessellation (translucent design), designed by Shuzo Fujimoto, is not listed in any of his books or magazines (as far as I know). I discovered it among other models in a picture made inside Fujimoto’s home by Robert Lang. Details were not very clear in the photograph, but I managed to reverse-engineer the model. It is a tessellated version of CFW 90 star, with triangle twists added where necessary to connect the hex-twist-based elements, and the rhombi around the modified hex twist folded in half along the longer axis and squashed.
The existence of this model shows that Fujimoto knew some of his stars were actually tessellation molecules even if the tessellations do not appear as separate models in his books. This in turn makes it likely he had also folded, even if not documented, some models I’ve been speculating about, including tessellations and fractals based on molecules found in his stars.

Kites
I designed this model during a stop while trekking in the Sudetes mountain range in the summer of 2022, as you can see in the picture of the prototype. A few months later, I folded a complete tessellation. The molecule is quite simple (modified hex twist with two sinks) but produces an interesting pattern. You can rotate each molecule independently, so various arrangements are possible. Apart from the “linear” arrangement shown here, you can also place the kites in a “radial” pattern. Modifying the spacing can also affect the looks quite a bit. In particular, a very dense layout with no free spaces between molecules should be interesting, but will be really challenging to fold.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 93)
One of Shuzo Fujimoto’s basic stars which consists of just a single tessellation molecule without any additional paper around it. As with some other models in this class, I haven’t found any documentation of Fujimoto actually folding a @tessellation of these molecules, which of course does not preclude the possibility of him knowing it could be tessellated. So far, I haven’t folded the tessellated version in practice, either, since the process will likely be quite difficult due to the way the rays are made of outside reverse folds, which will probably be hard to fold if the edges of the sheet are not anywhere near.

Star a la Fujimoto III (orange art nouveau paper)
Star a la Fujimoto III is a great way to showcase patterned papers, in this case an art nouveau themed gift wrapping paper.

Thorn (CFW 86)
One of Shuzo Fujimoto’s basic stars that consist just of a tessellation molecule with no extra paper around it, and can become more complex stars when decorated edges are added. I’m not aware whether Fujimoto was aware of the fact that you can tessellate this design since I could not find any trace of this specific molecule used for a tessellation in his books, but given examples of his creativity and exploration of patterns elsewhere, my guess would be he knew it could be tessellated.
In Fujimoto’s drawings, this design looks just like CFW 89, but this is due to the drawings being not shaded and not showing layer ordering. A comparison of back sides reveals these designs are different.

Clustered Bricks
This design is a variant of Shifted Bricks. Every other brick in each row is of different length. Since the rows are shifted relative to each other, if you look the right way, you can see four-brick clusters that form larger rectangles (narrow-wide in top row, and wide-narrow in the row below). This is just one of many examples how you can vary the bricks’ lengths in interesting ways.
The tessellation is iso-area, with the back side being a mirror reflection of the front. Folded from black Satogami paper.
I saw someone publish the same design on Instagram, with the information they learned it in one of Madonna Yoder’s workshops, so like many other members of the Pythagorean Tiling Family, this one has probably also been reinvented independently by many people.

Four-Sink Base Tessellation (Larger Spacing)
This is a fold of just a simple Four-Sink Base Tessellation but with additional space of one grid unit between molecules. Folded from a sheet of red Nicolas Terry Tissue Foil, this model neatly shows the difference in texture between the shiny and matt sides of the paper. The picture of the precreased sheet shows translucency of the lighter colors of this paper type.

Ladybug Box
This box is decorated with a ladybug, which is a tessellation molecule. I used the same molecule for a BBU tile variant to make a decorated cube. While the finished molecule is axially symmetric, the underlying crease pattern is not, due to the different pleat arrangement in the body and the head.
The structure is related to my Ladybug 1.1, but had to be adapted in order to become a tessellation molecule, and of course the color change had to go.
I haven’t folded a multi-molecule @tessellation of this design yet, but it seems possible to make various arrangements of molecules, both ladybugs going in opposite directions, and combinations where they are rotated 90° relative to each other.

Iso-Area Triangle Twists (CFW 68)
This “translucent design” by Shuzo Fujimoto is an example of iso-area tessellations: both sides have the same pattern
(except for rotation). The point below the center of each triangle twist on one side is the meeting point of three triangle twists on the other side. In back-light this means that behind each point where three triangles meet, a shadow of a triangle from the other side of the tessellation is visible. While iso-area, this pattern is not a flagstone: on each side there are two “layers”, with every other triangle being in the top layer and every other in the deeper layer.
This fold was made with a sheet of Washi with glittering sprinkles inside. Note how the tessellation’s molecules are offset from the grid’s center of symmetry, resulting in asymmetric margins on different sides. Since this is an iso-area tessellation, the descriptions of pictures as being the front or back of the model are due to the paper being different on the two sides, and the fact that even an iso-area tessellation differs on the two sides when folded from a finite grid.

Body and  Soul
This tessellation consists of alternating layers of two types of elements that differ significantly in their appearance and complexity. The folding sequence is quite elegant and, as is rarely the case, apart from different precreasing, a clean fold can be made using the same sequence as a fold from complete grid.
Even the clean fold retains some visible crease lines, though, and avoiding those would be very difficult if possible at all due to the way layers are arranged. A molecule is 6×8 grid units which means a square sheet results in a rectangular tessellation. I plan to make another fold some time, with layers arranged horizontally rather than vertically.

Woven Triangles Tessellation XVIII
Derived from Woven Triangles Tessellation II, this pattern has a number of creases converge at the center of the molecule. Sharp outlines of 90° triangles in the top layer have the effect that at first sight of multiple molecules placed side by side, what first springs into view are “squares with bow ties” created in the space between molecules rather than “four woven triangles rotating around a point”.

Back-Twisted Square Twists (CFW 293)
This is a tessellation many origamists discover independently, though Fujimoto was probably among the first to do so.
This tessellation is not featured as a separate design in any of his books, but the same molecule is used as part of a larger composition in CFW 262 which appears on page 163 of Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami. I would have missed it, but I spotted a model consisting of just this molecule in the background of a picture taken inside Fujimoto’s home that I got from Robert Lang.
While the pattern isn’t very interesting in reflected light, in back-light it becomes much more appealing.
After folding this model and taking pictures, I modified it to become Electric Tessellation.

Electric Tessellation
This tessellation is just slightly modified back-twisted square twists, but it looks quite nice anyway, especially in backlight.

Box with Woven Triangles XIX
Design derived from Box with Woven Triangles XVIII by rearranging layers.

Star a la Fujimoto III (striped paper)
Star a la Fujimoto III looks particularly interesting when folded from paper whose pattern has hexagonal symmetry.

Star a la Fujimoto III (variant B)
In this variant, the rays are layered “one on top of the other” rather than “every other one in a different layer”. This changes the appearance of the front only slightly, but is more visible on the back. Patterned duo paper courtesy of a friend.

Square Interlace Tessellation (undulated)
Who says tessellations have to be flat? Even tessellations with flat molecules can be warped and twisted into various interesting shapes, and one technique that enables such shaping is wet folding. In less than two weeks, I’ll be the special guest at
Outdoor Origami Meeting 2023 and one of the workshops I’ll be giving will be about wet-folding tessellations. I hope you enjoy it!

Box with Woven Triangles XVIII (white flax paper)
I folded this box in order to test John Gerard’s pure flax white paper. You can read more in my review of this paper.

Sol (clean fold)
When preparing my workshops for the German Origami Convention (coming up in slightly more than a week), I improved upon my original precrease for the
Sol model and folded this piece without any visible grid lines (not even on the rays). The paper was an unidentified sheet from BOS supplies I got at BOS50 convention.

Family Portrait of Boxes with Woven Triangles I-XVI
These pictures show sixteen boxes decorated with tessellation molecules belonging to the Woven Triangles family, folded in the years 2020-2021. All boxes were folded from sheets of same size (15 cm Tant), and except for
Box with Woven Triangles IV, folded they are also of same size. After this picture was taken, I designed and photographed more models in this family.
Here is the list of models visible in the picture, left-to-right and top-to-bottom:

Well II
This is another approach to the subject I already presented in Well I, with the central square being larger and the arrangement of bricks around it having axial in addition to rotational symmetry. I have also noticed this pattern used in architecture, for example on the floor near the entrance to the Dominican church in Warsaw’s Służew district.
The front of this tessellation is a flagstone, and the back is one almost: it has a non-flagstone hole in the center. Just like Well I, the pattern can grow out to infinity, but I also believe it to be possible to tile finite subsets side by side.

Heart, Ladybug, and Mushroom on BBU Cube
This model is just a friendly reminder that almost any tessellation can be transformed into a BBU tile, and combined with other tiles to create 3D shapes with interesting decoration. Here, I used three tessellations not yet published elsewhere: Heart II variant B, Ladybug, and Mushroom. The three hidden faces of the cube are flat (BBU A2 tiles) in order for the cube to have a flat bottom surface to rest on.

Empty Tomb
Happy Easter!

Woven Triangles Tessellation VI (3D shaping)
A model from September 2020, this is a 3D-shaped variant of Woven Triangles Tessellation VI, folded from the same sheet as the flat-shaped one. Pulling some pleats up from the plane creates interesting organic shapes. The Ogawa Washi paper
I used adds a furry appearance, but then again the purple color reminds this is no ordinary fur.

Improvisation in White
This is just a very simple tessellation on a hex grid. My first fold was indeed an improvisation, folded from a plain white sheet. This one is a refold in white-and-gold Kin no Kanze paper.

Tessellation Triste
This tessellation is based on a hex grid but the symmetry of molecules is triangular. This is also the reason the whole model is not a fully symmetric hexagon.
The two sides look quite different. In this fold I shaped the front three-dimensionally and the triaxial flowers combined with triangles between them resemble triskelion shapes. The back I shaped flat, with a rhythmic pattern of triangles alternating between flat and divided by angle bisectors.

Double Star
The inspiration for this design came to me from viewing the back side of Star a la Fujimoto III. Later,
I found out that Andrey Hechuev earlier designed a tessellation with the same pattern, and Natalia Guzowska had designed a very similar star as well.

Well I
In this tessellation, rectangles are arranged in layers around a central square. I called it Well since it reminds me of a perspective view looking down a well lined with bricks. There are a few other similar arrangements, and I have seen some used as tiling patterns on floors. This work is from a 32×32 grid, but a 16×16 grid is enough to get a feeling for its structure.
This tessellation is a flagstone on both sides. The structure is closely related to Pythagorean Tiling and Brick Road with just the arrangement of twists around the rectangles and rectangle proportions differing.
In contrast to most of my designs, this tessellation is neither periodic nor recursive, even though it can go on indefinitely given a large enough grid.
It seems, however, that one can also tile several such wells (of arbitrary size) side by side, so whether this tessellation is periodic or not will depend on whether you view the work seen here as a part of a single, infinitely large molecule, or a single finite molecule that can be tiled.
Update: it can be tiled (and thus made periodic) indeed.
Depending on how you look at this pattern, you can either consider the bricks to be placed in concentric square “rings” of increasing diameter, or on a single spiral which winds around the center turn after turn.

Box with Woven Triangles XVIII
This model is derived from Box with Woven Triangles II by sinking one edge of the triangle which results in a striking pattern of triangular flat islands between the areas where the squashed triangles are. I haven’t folded a @tessellation of multiple such molecules yet (update: now I have), but I’m pretty sure it will be a very nice one.

Handle (CFW 133)
This star, designed by Shuzo Fujimoto, has untypically shaped rays which make it look like the handle of an old tap.
CFW 174 is a minor variant of CFW 133.

Box with Greek Cross and Squares IV
The tessellation molecule decorating this box is one of many similar patterns I designed after my visit to CfC conference in Zaragoza in February 2020. While sightseeing in the Aljafería castle, I stumbled upon an interesting floor tile pattern, and set out to design a similar tessellation in origami. Soon after I came back, the pandemic arrived, and I was distracted from those projects. The name of this tiling, Greek Cross and Squares IV is not apparent when you look at the box, which has only a single molecule, but if you tessellate it and put no additional spacing between the molecules, you do get a pattern of crosses and squares. This is slightly different from the pattern I saw on the floor, which has crosses and squares of two different sizes.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 110)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto combines a central molecule taken from CFW 56 Tessellation
(or Windmill, CFW 84) with sharpened rays which mimic a very similar pattern on the outer edge. This is basically Daffodil (CFW 100), with the outer rays folded behind in half.

Origami in Shades of Gray
This is a collections of my origami tessellations that I framed and hung near the desk I use for folding. The models, all kept in neutral colors, are as follows
(left to right).
Top row:
Bottom row:

Scissors Tessellation
This is my @tessellation of Shuzo Fujimoto’s CFW 87 Scissors. Each molecule can be rotated independently of others. As far I’m aware, Fujimoto himself never tessellated this pattern. Many other of his stars are likewise based on tessellation molecules which
I was not able to find in tessellated form in any of his publications. Perhaps he didn’t realize they could be tessellated, or perhaps he knew but just didn’t publish it.
Such a situation poses an interesting challenge when I try to organize models presented on my web page by linking designs to their “base models”. From a morphological point of view, I consider a @tessellation of a molecule to be the “primary” variant, with the star being a special case consisting of just a single molecule. However, from a historic point of view, in this case the stars came first and the tessellation later, with the original author probably not being aware of its existence. So, if I were to follow the historic point of view rather than the morphological, the relation would be reversed.

Epiphany V
This year’s model of the Star of Bethlehem for Epiphany is based on my Star of David I molecule.
The model as a whole is very similar to Epiphany III, the difference being the star and its tail are formed by negative space (the tail is also attached to the star in a slightly different way).
This design gave me a lot of trouble when I tried to construct its clean precrease using only origami methods. I was able to do it for the box with Star of David I because the box was folded from a hexagon, whose edges I could use as references. Folding from a rectangle made it much harder, and I realized I could probably not avoid precreasing at least the three axes of the hexagon in the center of the star.
So, I devised a different technique. I will probably write a separate post about it, but the underlying idea is very simple: first I precreased the model on a separate sheet using the full grid (which was easy), and then scored over this precreased sheet in order to copy the creases that are actually folded in the final model onto the target sheet. While not a pure origami method, it still uses only hand tools, so I think it is purer than printing out the crease pattern using a printer or scoring machine. Not needing such advanced devices is an advantage since not everyone has access to them, and it works for a much broader array of paper types and sizes than such devices can handle.

2023 in Maya Numerals
This origami tessellation represents the number 2023 using Maya numerals as 𝋥𝋡𝋣. This system is vigesimal (base 20) and individual digits are read top-to-bottom: the horizontal bar stands for 5, the single and triple dots for 1 and 3, respectively, giving the number
5⋅20² + 1⋅20¹ + 3⋅20⁰ = 5⋅400 + 20 + 3 = 2023. This particular number has a very nice, symmetric appearance when written in this system, so I chose it for this year’s New Year’s model. Obviously, according to actual Maya calendar, the date would be different from 2023.
For this work, I used Okta paper for the first time. I like its wrinkled, stone-like texture which was a perfect match for this model, but folding properties were not very good for a tessellation. I might write a full review when I get some more experience with this paper type.
Meanwhile, a somewhat belated happy New Year 2023!

Star a la Fujimoto III
This model belongs to a series inspired by the work of Shuzo Fujimoto. The outer edge is made with a general technique
I devised that can be combined with different tessellation molecules located in the center. In particular, it can be combined with many of Fujimoto’s molecules
(the one here is derived from CFW 88, Hemp Leaf), and hence the name “a la Fujimoto”. I don’t have a nice name for the technique yet, and I’m going to need one since this has recently been my favorite way of showcasing a single molecule of a hex-grid tessellation, and
I’ve been using it a lot. The color change neatly separates the molecule from the background. Update: I called the technique
Color-Wrap Rays.

Scissors Fractal
This is a recursive version of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Scissors (CFW 87). I wanted to call it Biohazard Fractal since it resembles the biohazard symbol, but later decided to stay with the name Fujimoto used for his base model.
I am not sure whether Fujimoto was aware of the possibility of extending his original CFW 87 design into a fractal. I discovered that a number of his molecules can be fractalized this way (pictures coming up) but the only example of him using such a procedure is the Lucky Star Fractal which is derived from CFW 88 (Hemp Leaf) in a similar manner. Since I was aware of Lucky Star Fractal and it still took me quite a while to realize that the process could be generalized to other molecules, unless I find firm evidence to the contrary, I will assume Fujimoto did not know of the other fractal designs.
While Lucky Star Fractal has six-fold symmetry, Scissors has only tri-fold symmetry. This means that each consecutive level of the fractal can be rotated relative to the previous one in two ways rather than one. The model presented here uses consistent rotation on all levels. Another highly symmetric possibility is alternating the direction every other level. I also took a picture comparing both variants side by side.
However, the direction for each level is independent, so completely random assignment is possible as well.
Since the outermost level of the fractal resembles the base molecule from which it is derived, it shares its properties in that it can be tessellated. Due to the way layers of paper lock together, this molecule is harder to fold than Lucky Star Fractal, especially at deeper levels. Since accessing those deep layers requires opening up the molecule significantly, tessellating it will probably also be quite challenging in practice. The shrink factor is √3 (same as for
Lucky Star Fractal and other fractals in this family) which means consecutive levels become smaller quite fast. This work has just 3 levels, but I had to use
35 cm paper to get there. I could add one or two more, but they would not end up neat (more due to the difficulty accessing deep layers than to shrinking).

Scissors Fractal (alternating rotation)
This is another fold of Scissors Fractal, a recursive model I derived from Shuzo Fujimoto’s
Scissors (CFW 87). In this fold, the direction each level rotates relative to the previous, alternates every other level. See the description of Scissors Fractal for more details on this design’s structure and its relation to other designs.

Comparison of Scissors Fractal Variants — alternating and consistent rotation direction
A comparison of two variants of Scissors Fractal: one with consistent rotation direction for all levels and one with alternating rotation directions.

Holly
This Rosette variant looks like holly leaves.

Box with Woven Triangles XVII
This design is pretty much like Box with Woven Triangles XII but with different layer ordering.
The change results in the triangles being covered by pleats and barely recognizable.

Hinged Shamrock Box
This box, designed in late 2020, is decorated with a shamrock, and folded from a single square of Tant paper. In contrast to most of my box designs, in which the lid is separate from the bottom part, this one is single-part and opens via a hinge. Two large flaps on both sides lock underneath a pleat that goes along the bottom of the box, making it possible to close the box quite neatly.
In order to limit the design to the convenient 16×16 grid, I ended up with a slit between the closed lid and the front wall. Using a slightly larger grid, it should be easy to add a small flap in front of the lid and ensure that in closed state, nothing can fall out of the box.

Chipped Box
Top edges of this box look as if they were chipped, hence the name. The whole top area is a tessellation molecule, derived by a simple change from the base that underlies the Pythagorean Tiling family. When multiple are put side by side, the chips align, each pair forming a larger chip in the form of an isosceles triangle.

Box with Fat Propeller
This box is decorated with a single molecule of Fat Propellers Tessellation. I designed the molecule and folded a box decorated with it no later than 2017, and then refolded it in 2022 using a cleaner precrease and with more free space around the molecule.

Translucent Design (CFW 55)
This tessellation, designed by Shuzo Fujimoto, is almost identical to my
John Lackland Tessellation except for using petal folds instead of simple valley folds for decoration in the four corners of a molecule.
This design is very similar to CFW 328 (pictures coming up) and it took me while to figure out they were two separate designs and how they differed since
Fujimoto’s books don’t contain any instructions or crease patterns but only low-quality images of the folded models in back light. The key to telling the two tessellations apart is how pleats that emanate from each molecule are aligned: in this design (CFW 55), pleats are parallel to the direction pointed by the petals while in CFW 328, pleats are rotated 45° relative to the petals.

Woven Triangles Tessellation VIII (loose spacing)
This fold of Woven Triangles Tessellation VIII uses larger spacing between the molecules than the previous one, resulting in a different looking model. Gone are the rhombi that were created by triangles from neighbor molecules and each molecule feels like a separate entity now. Due to being folded from much thinner and more translucent paper, this model is also well suited for taking a picture in back light, revealing its internal structure.

Seal of a Secret Society Tessellation
I was inspired to design the molecule of this tessellation after spending a lot of time analyzing various designs of Shuzo Fujimoto’s stars.
Since pleats in the back are symmetric, you can rotate each individual symbol in 60° intervals, independently of other molecules.
The picture of the front side of the model demonstrates how complex a topic color is. Since the sheet is painted rather than made from colored pulp, at a few spots the paint wore off, showing the white underneath. I painted these spots over with a black permanent marker. Despite being black just as the paper, you can easily notice these spots: the surface there is shiny and stands out despite theoretically being the same color.
This model is folded from a duo-color back-and-white sheet of Nihonshi paper, a rare example of me folding tessellations from duo paper.

Seal of a Secret Society (Maya paper)
I folded this Seal of a Secret Society from Clairefointaine Maya paper for the sake of creating a phototutorial on this model.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 91)
This star by Shuzo Fujimoto has a decoration made from six radially aligned petal folds in the center. After minor modification, it can be tessellated (I’m not sure if Fujimoto was aware of this).
I will teach this model along with CFW 120 and CFW 103 at the big online event dedicated to Fujimoto this Saturday.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 103)
This star by Fujimoto is basically the same thing as CFW 87 but folded from a 6×6×6 grid, which results in more paper around the central molecule and a different look. The molecule in the center, resembling the biohazard symbol, can be tessellated (I don’t know if Fujimoto was aware of this). It is also possible to create a fractal version. Both operations are possible for other molecules found in Fujimoto’s stars as well, and I plan to publish some examples of such modifications I have folded while studying Fujimoto’s designs in recent months.

Stars and Squares (CFW 53) big
After I designed this tessellation, I learned that Shuzo Fujimoto had designed the same thing about 40 years earlier.
This was the first time such independent invention of a model happened to me. Later I found out this actually happens once in a while, especially in the world of geometric origami.
This tessellation, one of Fujimoto’s translucent designs, is a modification of square twists by pursing, and very simple to fold. The work presented here contains more molecules than my previous folds.

Translucent Design (CFW 58)
This is one of Fujimoto’s translucent designs, a name he used for many of his tessellations. Folded from rare blue Elephant Hide paper, this work is not very much translucent, but on the other hand this thick paper shows the texture of the model well in reflected light.
Front and back feature somewhat different patterns, both involving equilateral triangles. The way I know which side should be considered front and which back is I got my hands on a picture of this design folded by Fujimoto (see below) and since he used duo paper, I assumed front was the color side.
There are no instructions for this model in Fujimoto’s books apart from pictures of finished model in strong back-light and of rather poor quality
(Twist Origami I, page 33; Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami, page 163). Fortunately, thanks to Satoko Saito, I also got hold of a picture of another fold by Fujimoto himself, and that one was a color picture, in reflected light, and of much higher quality, making the reverse-engineering much easier. In a way, this design can be viewed as a triangle twist tessellation with modified pleat assignment.

Woven Triangles Tessellation VIII
In this model, the four triangles located around the center of the molecule are located below other layers of paper, only partially peeking outside.
Triangles from the top layers of neighboring molecules connect to form rhombi while the negative space between molecules forms little stars. This effect is achieved with a dense molecule layout. Increasing the spacing between molecules produces a model which feels quite different (pictures coming up).
This model was folded from the same sheet as my earlier Pythagorean Tiling with 3:2 Ratio and you can see that the back side still displays the Pythagorean tiling pattern.

Pythagorean Tiling with 3:2 Ratio (32×32 grid)
While my first fold of this variant was from a 16×16 grid, this one is from 32×32, which produces many more molecules and better shows how squares of two sizes tile the plane.
I later worked further on the same sheet, producing Woven Triangles Tessellation VIII.

Seal of a Secret Society
I came up with this design due to folding lots of stars by Shuzo Fujimoto recently. Since this is not the first time new ideas pop up based on his works (think Hydringea by Robin Scholz, When Rebecca met Shuzo by Robert Lang, Watering Fujimoto’s Garden by Chris Palmer, and a few designs by yours truly as well), I suggest we introduce a new hashtag, #InspiredByFujimoto for marking such designs.
The molecule in the center of the star can be tessellated. Since pleats in the back can be made symmetric, one can rotate each individual symbol in 60° intervals, independently of other molecules.

Stars and Triangles (CFW 56)
This is one of Shuzo Fujimoto’s translucent designs. For my personal use, I call it Stars and Triangles as an analogy to Stars and Squares which is the same idea but executed on a square rather than hex grid. Since hex twists alone can’t tile the plane due to chirality issues, on the hex grid we need two kinds of molecules rather than just a single one like on a square grid: the starting point for this tessellation is 3.6.3.6 tessellation.
This work was designed by Shuzo Fujimoto and folded by me from a grid that was precreased by Ben Parker, so three origamists were involved in one way or another, one of them posthumously. Come to think also about people who were not consciously working on origami, but whose work was nonetheless necessary for this piece to come to be, quite a bunch had to put in their work: someone had to design the paper (and
Elephant Hide is truly an engineering marvel), distribute and sell it, quite a few people must have been involved in the logistics of getting this sheet first to Ben’s home in the USA and then to mine in Poland. Even the simple art of origami shows how interconnected our world has become for better or worse.

Worlds Apart
This model has been long in the making and is based on ideas of my Brain in a Vat from 2016 which in turn uses a technique I learned from Joanna Sobczyk the year before. Apart from the shaping, the structure of the tessellation is that of Fujimoto’s 3.6.3.6, and actually this model is physically the same piece of paper as my recent fold of 3.6.3.6.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 122)
A star by Shuzo Fujimoto. The front looks as if woven from mutually intersecting triangles while the back is rather plain.
A very similar model, CFW 120 looks the same at least on one side but is folded from a twist of different size relative to the sheet (I’m still in the process of determining what it really looks like since only a rough drawing of one side is available and no instructions other than the beginning twist).

Hex Twist Star (CFW 104)
This star by Fujimoto is broadly speaking a level-2 Lucky Star Fractal folded from a slightly smaller hexagon so that there is less paper available on the back side.

Box with Woven Triangles XV
This model from Woven Triangles series features a frame that surrounds the four interwoven triangles in the center of the molecule.

Iso-Area Square Twists (CFW 66)
This design by Shuzo Fujimoto is an early example of an iso-area tessellation, i.e. one which looks the same on both sides, apart from possibly rotations and translations. The way I arranged the molecules on the sheet results in a straight margin on the model and slightly different shapes formed by the molecules: a rotated square on one side and a rounded shape on the other. This does not negate the tessellation being iso-area since that notion applies to the tessellation understood as an infinite pattern covering the complete plane. When a finite number of molecules are folded on a finite sheet, certain anomalies arise near the margins, and can be used for aesthetic effect.

Flasher
At one point I thought I’d design an origami flasher. Unsurprisingly, since I went for the simplest possible idea, I ended up with a design which had been independently made by others before, namely by Jeremy Shafer and Chris Palmer, possibly also others. Nonetheless, its simplicity and elegance make this model very enjoyable.

Hypar Flasher
This origami flasher snaps into a hyperbolic paraboloid when unfurled. The center is based on a set of twists similar to those used in the
Pythagorean Tiling family of designs. It can be a way of achieving a hypar shape alternative to the classic hypar design. Both sides are a little different: this model is not iso-area. When fully compressed, the flasher becomes much smaller, with a small “bowl” in the center surrounded by thick walls made from folded layers of the remaining paper.
This design is quite similar to Simple Flasher Labyrinth by Jeremy Shafer — see this comment on FB.

Screw Propeller
This Rosette variant resembles a screw propeller like those found on ships.

Walk of Fame
This tessellation is closely related to the 1:1 Pythagorean Tiling, but the twists are slightly different.
Still, the design remains iso-area. The squares and the negative space between them resemble pavement tiles and stars, forming a walk of fame such as the famous one found in Hollywood.

3.6.3.6 Tessellation (CFW 61)
One of the classic tessellations from a hex grid, first published by Shuzo Fujimoto. It uses molecules of two types, hex and triangle twists, and understanding how they connect is a good exercise in managing chirality and pleat connections.
I later used the same sheet of paper to fold Worlds Apart.

Windmill from Square (CFW 81)
One of the simplest among Fujimoto’s stars. This design is folded from a square, but only a hexagonal part of it is used (this technique is CFW 414). CFW 84 is the version folded directly from a hexagon, so CFW 81 = CFW 414 applied to CFW 84.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 105)
This star would have been simple to fold were it not for the final folds that create the small hexagon in the center. These folds on each side should be perfectly symmetric and at the same time they lock each another in place: the folded state can’t really be achieved without the paper intersecting itself.
In practice you can get close due to the paper not being perfectly rigid, but it’s much harder to fold neatly than one could expect from such a simple arrangement of layers.
This model appears under the name “No 22” in the section with stars in Twist Origami I and as “16” in the corresponding section of Invitation to Creative
Playing with Origami.

Z-Box (variant B)
In this variant of my Z-Box, the serifs on the letter Z are truncated and the letter has a more rounded look.
At the time I designed the original and the B variant of the Z-Box/Tessellation, I could not have foreseen that the letter would some time later be used as the
Zwastika — a symbol of the Russian forces invading Ukraine. Obviously, this kind of symbolism is not intended, and the letter Z stands for nothing more than the last letter of the Latin alphabet.

Braided Pinwheel Tessellation (variant C)
This is variant C of Braided Pinwheel Tessellation. The molecule looks like a combination of variant A and variant B molecule. There are quite a few layers of paper there and this fold ended up being less precise than I wanted.

Framed Heart (Elephant Hide)
My Framed Heart, folded from the rare red Elephant Hide paper in late 2019.
The heart can be tessellated, but I haven’t folded it this way in practice yet.

Star Tessellation (CFW 59)
This is one of Fujimoto’s famous translucent designs — tessellations designed to be viewed in back-light. Fujimoto folded them using thinner paper than the Kirabiki used here, so in his pictures the contrast between the stars and the background is higher. Interestingly, even in back light, the model’s look differs quite a bit between the two sides.
This design does not seem to have any unique name in Fujimoto’s books — the name Star Tessellation is mine.

Box with Woven Triangles XIV
This variant of Woven Triangles is very similar to number XIII except for the pleat visible on the box’s side having a different layer ordering.

Hex Twist Star (CFW 90)
This star is as simple as it gets — literally just a single rearranged hex twist made on a hexagon of the right size relative to the twist’s central hexagon.
This star appears as star number 7 both in Twist Origami I and in Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami.

Parallelograms (rotated, dense)
This is an alternate way of laying out molecules of Parallelograms tessellation. Because of how the pleats exiting the molecule are arranged, it is possible to chain together the pleats on the horizontal axes of two neighbors as in the basic version, or to chain one molecule’s horizontal axis to the other’s vertical axis as is the case here. The model shown here is folded from a single square of
Biotope paper, and based on a 32×32 grid, but since I folded it using my clean folding techniques, grid lines are not visible in the finished work.

Woven Triangles Tessellation VII
Folded from Nicolas Terry Tissue Foil for its good memory and thinness. The glittery texture looks very nice in real life, but makes the model difficult to photograph.

Scissors (CFW 87)
This star is folded from a hexagon but has triaxial symmetry which reminds me of the biohazard symbol.
Compare with CFW 103.
In a rare coincidence, this star has the same number, 4, in both Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami and
Twist Origami I.

Parallelograms (rotated, sparse)
The way pleats exit the Parallelograms molecule allows the molecules to be connected in more than one way. In the standard Parallelograms layout, individual molecules are connected into parallel rows. In the layout shown here, they form a network of two sets of rows rotated 90° relative to each other. I added a bit more space to make the model easier to collapse cleanly, but a denser layout is also possible. Actually, both models with rotated layout were easier to collapse cleanly than the one with default layout.

Parallelograms (clean fold)
When I originally folded Parallelograms in 2020, I designed a clean pre-crease pattern, pre-creased the sheet, and then… was unable to collapse it cleanly. I went back to folding the model from a complete grid, but kept the original precreased sheet for later. That time came in 2022 when I revisited that sheet, and with more folding experience under my belt, was able to collapse it neatly this time.
You can see slight creases on the parallelograms’ surface, but they are not very conspicuous, and would probably not have appeared if I had used paper with better bendability than Tant or even just placed the precrease pattern on the sheet rotated 90° in order to make better use of paper grain.
Some designs take a lot of time to fully develop, and this one is quite typical:

Warp Speed
This Rosette variant is “flattened” and has lower rotational symmetry than most others.

Square Twist Star (CFW 150)
A star from square twist that uses a similar technique as the Dahlia for shaping the petals.
It can be seen as a single molecule of Propellers Tessellation (CFW 54) with some decorations around the edges of the paper.
Appears as star 32 in Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami and “No 65” in Twist Origami I.

Box with Woven Triangles XII
This version of Woven Triangles molecule looks very similar to 
Woven Triangles I at first glance but has a different arrangement of pleats. These seem to circle around the center, and indeed with minor modification, this design leads to the Whirlwind molecule.
The molecule is from 2020, but I found out Madonna Yoder created the same design independently before me and folded it from fabric as early as 2019.

Coat of Arms of Mariupol
This is the coat of arms of the city of Mariupol where fierce fighting in the Azovstal iron works is currently taking place. It is not surprising for a port city to use an anchor as its symbol. Incidentally, the anchor is also a symbol of hope, strength and steadfastness, and as such it was used for example during World War II by the Polish Underground State.
One sheet of paper, folded.

Hexagons and Rhombi
This tessellation differs from most other designs by having lower rotational symmetry: only 180° rather than the 60° typical for tessellations based on a hex grid. This is more of a technique than a single pattern since each rhombus row can be substituted for a hexagon row. One way of looking at it is saying that a vertex of a rhombus can be extended into an edge, transforming the rhombus into a hexagon. In this particular work, central part is the more regular 1-1 (hexagons-rhombi) row arrangement while at the edges the 1-2 (1 row of hexagons followed by two rows of rhombi) pattern appears.
There are many ways of arranging the pleats on the back side. Here, I chose a fairly symmetric one which results in a nice layering on the front but also produces an interesting garland-like pattern on the back where there are two adjacent rows of rhombi (see the close-up image of back side).

Hydrangea Basic Form A variant 1
A very simple variant of Fujimoto’s Hydrangea, which does not seem to be popular among folders so far.

Easter Egg
Decorating Easter Eggs is a popular Easter tradition in Poland, Ukraine, and other Slavic countries. This one is folded from a single sheet of paper rather than painted or scratched. The origami tessellation molecules used for the strips of geometric patterns are based on my
Rhombi Rows design, with two different stretch factors.

Sol
A Rosette variant which resembles the Spring Sun. Back side is quite interesting as well.

Column of Flagellation
Originally, this work was supposed to be a joke, and to get a punny title such as Vertebral Column or Ribbed Column. However, while I was working on it, my vision of what the work should become drifted towards more somber subjects, and I came up with the idea it could reference the Flagellation of Christ, a common subject in European art, and a topic matching the Holy Week.

Tumbling Square Rosette
Another flat variant of Rosette. This one’s outline is much less round than that of others, hence the name.
Especially when framed in an asymmetric manner, the square really seems to tumble. I like asymmetric framing, whether it is part of the model itself or based on an external frame/passe-partout like here: asymmetry brings a lot of dynamic into the picture.

Close-Quarters Folding (Lizard Hide Paper)
Another fold of my Close-Quarters Folding tessellation, this time from 20×20 grid which gives the central part with small squares and the margin of larger squares equal sizes. Folded from red Lizard Hide paper.

Maltese Rosette
This variant of Rosette is called Maltese Rosette because the outline of its “petals” resembles a Maltese cross.
In contrast to the plain Rosette, which is 3D and uses curved folding, this one is flat and uses straight creases only.
This is the first model I folded from OK Myusukaizeru paper but it’s too early to write a review yet.

Woven Triangles Tessellation V (purple Ogawa Washi)
Another fold of my Woven Triangles Tessellation V, this time from purple Ogawa Washi paper. It is physically the same sheet which later became Woven Triangles Tessellation VI since V is one of the intermediate stages when folding VI.

Hydrangea Brick (レンガ, Renga) variant
A variant of Fujimoto’s Hydrangea, called Brick (レンガ, Renga).

The Golden Gate of Kyiv
The Golden Gate of Kyiv (Золоті ворота) was the main gate of the city in the early middle ages. Today the city is under attack again.
Origami tessellation folded from a single sheet of Elephant Hide paper (old stock — this color is no longer produced).

Whirlwind Tessellation
It took me a while between folding a box decorated with a single molecule and folding a complete tessellation.
What you see here is my third attempt as I was not happy with the earlier two. Folding this tessellation cleanly, without any visible grid, requires a complex precreasing sequence, and the collapse is also rather hard. For the third attempt, I chose Grainy paper which not only matches this model visually, with the texture resembling splashes of water or fragments of debris carried by the whirlwind, but also has good bendability which simplified constructing the precrease and making the curved shaping folds.

Stacked Whirlwind Molecule
This is a single molecule which can be tessellated. It is made from a molecule of Whirlwind Tessellation placed inside a larger one. More than the two levels shown here are possible. Curved folding combined with shiny metallic paper results in a very smooth model which feels almost as if folded from fabric. Seen at a low angle as in the last picture, the rim of the molecule looks like a series of sand dunes.
This molecule is an example of a class of recursive molecules which differ from typical recursive tessellations: you have to build it from the inside out (i.e., start with the smallest copy of the pattern and work outwards towards the larger ones) while in designs such as
Fujimoto’s Hydrangea you start from the outer copies and work towards the center, and are able to always add another, deeper level, as far as the paper’s thickness allows. In other words, in Stacked Whirlwind Tessellation, the center of the molecule is
“thin” while in Hydrangea it is “thick” and thus allows another iteration to be folded.

Yellow Brick Road
In line with the distinction made in my post on naming origami models, this design is called Brick Road while the particular work seen here is called Yellow Brick Road, for obvious reasons. The herringbone pattern as seen here is actually used for paving roads and sidewalks, and I have seen multiple examples in real life. It was already known in Roman times, under the name opus spicatum (spiked work).
The structure of the model is similar to others in the Pythagorean Tiling family, but compared to
Shifted Bricks, one twist is modified in order to switch every other brick’s direction. Interestingly, the back side has parallel rows of bricks and the visible top layer is identical to Shifted Bricks with 2:1 proportions (the inner layers differ, obviously). Both sides are flagstone @tessellations, which fits the pavement theme well.
Folded from a single sheet of yellow Satogami paper. The grid is 32×32. I optimized the precrease pattern (PreCP) to make the front completely clean while keeping the back reasonably clean: there is a single crease going through each brick on the back, but with this paper and lighting it is barely visible. In theory one could optimize it away, but that would make precreasing this already quite complex model even more tedious while the improvement in quality would be only minimal, so I let it be.
A short time after publishing this design, I found out that Frank van Kollem had earlier on designed a model which seems to be exactly the same.

Twisted Heart Tessellation
A design from 2017, this tessellation features hearts created from slightly modified square twists.

Box with Woven Triangles XI
In this Woven Triangles variant, pleats are not locked as strongly as in others, which will probably make folding a real multi-molecule tessellation neatly harder. Fortunately, in the case of a box, pleats are locked by side walls.

Rhombi Rows Tessellation
This tessellation, folded back in 2019, consists of series of rhombi. I do not use patterned paper much, but this time I decided to give it a try and folded this model from Rex Sadoch carta rivesto paper in order to test it. I thought the fleur-de-lys (⚜) pattern would be rather subtle, but it ended up almost obscuring the folded pattern almost completely. Despite this drawback, I think it is an interesting paper for folding.
My review describes it in more detail. You can have a look at the close-up picture to get a better idea of the tessellation itself. I’ve got to fold it from single-colored paper some time to better showcase the design.

Lucky Star Fractal Box (Simplified) Variant B
When you fold variants of my Lucky Star Box, you can extend the star to its fractal form.
This particular variant emerges when you apply that procedure to the simplified variant B of the design. Due to the slanted top, rays of the star look like the icing on a cake or some abstract tower with layers stacked on top of each other.

Close-Quarters Folding
This design emerges as one of intermediate stages during the folding of Rosette. I find its extreme minimalism very compelling.
This particular work is from a 16×16 grid but since the design is a tessellation, larger compositions of molecules like this are possible and due to matching pleat structure, can be combined with Rosette variants.

Rosette
This origami Rosette is a tessellation molecule (14×14 grid for the molecule, 16×16 for the whole work shown here), but I haven’t folded a model of more than one such molecule yet. One of intermediate stages while folding this design is in itself an interesting model,
Close Quarters Folding.
Many variants can be created by shaping the model differently. Some are 3D while others are flat but they share the same basic symmetry.

Z-Box
This box is decorated with a tessellation molecule representing the letter Z. Though it may not be obvious from its looks, this design is closely related to the
Woven Triangles family. It uses an 8×8 grid for the molecule (12×12 for the whole box). Folding it from the grid is relatively challenging due to a closed sink used for creating the diagonal stroke. Folding cleanly from a precrease without the grid comes with its own challenges, as usual. On the back of the molecule, an interesting pattern of two triangles emerges.

MMXXII
Happy 2022! This is my first fold of the year, and as usual I wanted it to be something related to the new year.
Since 2022 has a rare symmetry when rendered in Roman numerals (MMXXII), I chose this representation. I also recently received a package with my big order of papers from CDO store, so I wanted to start the new year with a new type of paper. The model is therefore folded from
Miyaginu paper which I never folded before. I plan to write a full review later on, but my first impressions are very good after folding this rather challenging design.
In the second image, you can take a peek at my design technique and see the stages a design like this goes through: first, the doodles of individual molecules, each folded from a test sheet with 16×16 grid, then planning for the layout of molecules and grid size (the final model ended up being from 64×16 grid), drawing the precrease pattern (PreCP), and the final work. A very important stage not shown here is the concept (hard to show since it’s an immaterial thing): writing out the year in Roman numerals had been in my plans for a few years at least, and the design of the molecules went through at least two earlier designs (each using a number of doodles during development), quite different from the improved molecules I ended up using. Also note the double-headed arrow on the design drawing, indicating preferred paper grain direction.
Since the molecules for letters M and X are much more complex than the I-molecule, and correspondingly, use more paper horizontally, the thickness of the model varies considerably along its length: it is thickest at the left and becomes thin towards the right end. This affected the model’s shaping and warping — I had to take special precautions in order for it to not be distorted in the end. This is similar to some figurative origami designs where an animal’s head has most detail, therefore also most paper, and the model may become unbalanced, causing the animal to tumble forward.
The year 2022 will also mark Shuzo Fujimoto’s 100th anniversary of birth. I’m working on some projects to commemorate this designer whose influence on geometric origami has been great. I also plan to prepare his biography and make it available online. If you have any interesting information about Shuzo Fujimoto and his life, whether firsthand experience, or interesting resources on-line or in print, do let me know.

Box with Woven Triangles X
In this member of the Woven Triangles family, the triangles have different proportions than the
√5:√5:√10 sides found in most other variants.

Box with Shy Flower
This box features a tessellation molecule which I called Shy Flower. I derived it from my earlier Braided Pinwheel Tessellation.
The flower is 3D and its most striking feature are the protruding stamens, almost as large as the petals.

Arrow Corrugation
In March 2020, shortly after the CfC2 conference, as the pandemic was just taking off, the origami Community for Creators started organizing online origami meetings. One of the first in which I took part was a workshop by Alejo Wilkinson. The model we folded was in itself not that interesting (a modified Miura-Ori, like this one), but I found the folding method really fascinating since it was a completely different approach than I myself used for folding this model. During the workshop, I got lost at one point and made some mistakes, which I later analyzed and which then led me to designing a completely new model, which you see here.
The name Arrow Corrugation was an obvious choice: despite the arrows not really being there (each one consists of two separate parts), their outline immediately comes to mind when you look at the model, especially in direct sunlight which exaggerates the shadows. This is an optical illusion similar to the
Kanizsa triangle.
The back side displays a fishbone-like pattern of parallel ribs with parallelograms emanating from their sides.
I was very happy with this design since I find it harder to design a corrugation than a regular tessellation. I performed some research and found a number of similar yet different designs: the blue corrugation by Robin Scholz, p35-Arrows by Frank van Kollem,
Up & Down Tessellation by Marc Vigo which seems to be the same as Straight Arrow Tile by Polly Verity,
Arrow Repeat also by Polly Verity, and Arrow Tessellation by Carlos Natan López Nazario.
Then, literally when writing this model description for my web page, I stumbled upon Polly Verity’s model
Arrow Castellation and realized it was exactly the same design, but created many years earlier (flickr picture is from 2006). Even later, I found out that Andrew Hudson also designed the same pattern, in early 2007.
So, yet another independent design (or discovery if you will). One thing I can never praise enough is flickr’s value as the place where you can search other people’s origami work and actually be able to find stuff using full-text search. I have learned so much about others’ work thanks to flickr, including even
Fujimoto’s work unearthed by Eric Gjerde and for me, this makes it much more valuable than other social media channels, even if they give me twenty times as many likes for each model. Creation and mutual learning are what counts.

Whirlwind Box (folded from full grid)
This Whirlwind Box is folded from a full 16×16 grid on copy paper. You can have a look at a fold from Tant paper and without the grid for a comparison of the differences between a quick fold and a clean fold. Note that in the quick fold I used a slightly modified lock: I’m not sure if it’s an improvement, but it’s just a little different.

Crowding Butterflies (diagonal 48 grid)
In the description of my recent Hydrangea Tessellation fold, I mentioned that I had recently experimented with different variants of the “leaves” which form the edges of the tessellation. This model is one such example: it’s based on a diagonal grid with 48 divisions. Since each molecule of the Crossed Box Pleat (CBP) which is the back side of this design uses 6 grid units, 48 grid units add up to 7 molecules (the diagonal of a 4-molecule square) and there are 3 grid units left on each end of the diagonal. With this layout, I could fold slightly different
“leaves” than the typical border made from a 2-unit margin on a non-rotated grid.
This model was folded as the base for a more complex tessellation which will be a collaboration with another folder.

Box with Woven Triangles IX
This is the first box in the Woven Triangles family to be based on a structure modified by twisting the square on the back side of the molecule. This also makes it a close relative of Whirlwind Box.
This design seems to be very similar to a tessellation by Endre Somos which he taught at
16th Outdoor Origami Meeting (Plener Origami) in 2017. Possibly only the way the triangles are spread-squashed differs (I did not attend the workshop at the time, but I ran into pictures of the finished model later on).

Hydrangea Tessellation
Believe it or not, over all these years of folding tessellations, I never folded a clean tiling of Fujimoto’s Hydrangea.
I recently decided to make up for this omission, so here goes the classic.
As with most other similar designs, different molecule packing densities are possible (the one used here is called the dense packing). The edges (“leaves”) can also be finished in multiple ways depending on how many grid units of margin are left around the molecules proper. I plan to post examples of different edge finishes when time allows.

Shifted Bricks (16×16 grid)
This fold of Shifted Bricks is folded from a full 16×16 grid, so you can see grid lines on the bricks.
Such a smaller version is what we can fold during workshops.

Shifted Bricks
Despite similar looks, this tessellation is not Momotani’s Wall — it is a different pattern designed by myself. Its relation to Momotani’s Wall is roughly such as the relation of Pythagorean Tiling to
Rectangle and Square Flagstone.
The twists being placed around the rectangle with rotational but without axial symmetry lead to some interesting properties. First, the tessellation is not rectangular, although the staggered rectangles create a roughly rectangular outline whose sides are not parallel to the sides of the bricks. Second, unlike
Momotani’s Brick Wall, the bricks in this design can be made with different proportions. The height is always two grid units and the length can be arbitrary as long as it’s at least two grid units. In this fold, the proportions are 3:2. The case with square bricks is the same design as
Pythagorean Tiling with 1:1 ratio and the way I came up with the idea for Shifted Bricks was by modifying that model. It is even possible to mix different brick lengths in a single model as long as the length is consistent along each strip of bricks whose top and bottom edges are adjacent.
Shifted Bricks is an iso-area tessellation. In contrast to Momotani’s Wall, the bricks on both sides are parallel rather than perpendicular to each other.
The direction of the slant between brick columns is mirrored between the sides. In the pictures you can see that I folded the model in such way that the front side is completely clean while the  back side has some visible construction creases. Folding both sides cleanly seems possible for but rather tedious for larger grids (the model shown here is from 32×32 grid).
I will be teaching this model at the online CDO convention this November.

Miura-Ori
Miura Ori is probably the best known origami corrugation. While the model is named after Koryo Miura who designed a variant which was later used for folding solar panels on a Japanese space probe, simpler variants such as the one shown here have been known since the 16th century and used as a decorative way of folding napkins. Sometimes, the model is referred to as
Herringbone Tessellation or Zig-Zag Tessellation.
Robert Lang’s @Tessellation book contains a detailed discussion of various variants of this design and their history.

Miura-Ori (asymmetric)
This is a simple modification of the Miura-Ori, with left and right legs at each vertex being different lengths.
I later refolded this model into The Cliff, and that model’s description also contains more information about the paper used.

Lucky Star Box (Simplified) Variant B
This is variant B of my Lucky Star Box (Simplified). It is derived from the basic variant by pushing inside the box the empty areas around the star, which vaults the top and makes the side walls look like the facets of a brilliant-cut diamond. It’s just a small modification, but I think it makes the design much more attractive.
The Lucky Star Molecule was designed independently by myself and Haligami, and variants also by many others. You can read more about it on Lucky Star Tessellation page.
The precrease pattern for this model is the same as for Egg Cup II which was derived from it.

Brick Wall
This classic model, often referred to by the name Momotani’s Wall, is an example of an iso-area tessellation: the front and back display the same pattern.
In this design, the pattern is rotated 90° between the two sides. In order to get a clean fold, I prepared a precrease pattern (PreCP) which results in a completely clean fold on one side and some helper creases visible on the other. While getting both sides clean seems possible in theory, precreasing such a pattern for a 32×32 grid as used here would be very tedious, so one clean side is a reasonable compromise. For 16×16, making both sides clean might still be practical.
My main reason for folding this model, apart from it being a classic, is that I designed a pattern called Shifted Bricks which looks similar but has a different internal structure.

Hydrangea (Tant)
Another fold of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea. I’ve kept two outermost leaf layers free of unnecessary creases.
For deeper layers, it becomes much harder.

Tic-Tac-Toe Board Foldable into a Bowl
This model, which includes @tessellation elements, has a 3×3 field of squares which reminds me of a tic-tac-toe game board. The pattern is based on
Square Pixel Tessellation. Edges can be folded inside which changes the model’s shape to one resembling a cross and that can further be refolded to form a bowl. Designed and folded in 2016.

Double Spearhead Tessellation (24×24)
This fold of Double Spearhead Tessellation with 6×6 molecules (24×24 grid) looks most interesting in back-light due to the fibers of mulberry paper becoming more pronounced.

Double Spearhead Tessellation Variants
This is a model folded back in 2018 which I somehow forgot to post earlier. Each molecule of my Double Spearhead Tessellation can be modified by sinking any number of the flaps located in its four sides. The work presented here contains mostly molecules in which two opposite sides were modified in this way since this variant results in a symmetric pattern when multiple molecules are placed side-by-side, but you can spot some other variants in the mix as well. One obvious possibility, which I didn’t use in this piece, is sinking all four sides. In back-light, all variants look almost the same since only the ordering of layers changes: the only visible differences come from the little reflected light which is always there.

Box with Woven Triangles VIII
As in Box with Woven Triangles VII, in Box with Woven Triangles VIII the triangles are located below other layers of paper and only partially peeking outside.

Parallelograms (prototype)
This is the prototype fold of Parallelograms Tessellation. It’s quite representative of my design technique: a quick doodle on a small grid and a rough sketch of the CP or PreCP for a single molecule. Note that I designed this model in June 2017, but it took me until June 2020 to make a nice fold and publish the pictures online, and until 2022 to be able to fold it without using the grid.

Chrysanthemum
This design is my modification of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea. Despite the change being very minor, it allows the model to be shaped in a more three-dimensional way, leading to a folded model which looks quite a bit different from the original. The pastel color and rough surface of Vintage paper seem to fit this design quite well.

Box with Woven Triangles XIII
When folding this box, I thought I was making a clean fold of Box with Woven Triangles XVI, but
I missed one detail and ended up with yet another design. You can tell the difference between XVI and XIII by looking at the edge between the box’s top and side walls. Read that model’s description linked above for all the details of the confusion that ensued.

Woven Triangles Tessellation VI
Another pattern in the Woven Triangles Family. This particular work uses standard, flat shaping but a different, three-dimensional shaping is also possible. Interestingly, in this design rectangles seem to be more prominent than triangles, something I didn’t realize before folding the complete multi-molecule tessellation.
This work is physically the same sheet that was previously folded into Woven Triangles Tessellation V.

Box with Woven Triangles I
This is a simple box with a molecule of Woven Triangles Tessellation I. My first attempt at folding this model resulted in a slightly modified molecule and ended up being called Box with Woven Triangles XVI.
You can learn more about the mistake on that model’s page. You can also see how I learned to fold models from the Woven Triangles family more neatly — compare the visible precrease lines in that model with this one’s clean look.

Hexagonal Honeycomb II (SBA-15)
I designed this model for the cover illustration of my father’s book on nanoparticles. It represents the structure of SBA-15, a type of mesoporous silica. My first thought when designing the model was to extend
Hexagonal Honeycomb by making the tubes longer, but I reckoned the model would use a huge number of units, and decided to design something new from scratch. The Hexagonal Honeycomb II unit I came up with produces tubes of the right proportions, from just a single unit per tube (plus connectors between tubes).

Pythagorean Tiling with 1:1 ratio
A variant of Pythagorean Tiling with 1:1 size ratio between the sides of the two types of squares.
This effectively makes the pattern uniform (all squares are the same) and the design becomes an iso-area flagstone tessellation. In the pictures of the front and back side, you can see that I optimized the precrease to get a clean look on the front side at the cost of additional crease lines visible on the back.
See the link above for more information about the various people who independently designed variants of this model.

San Francisco Bay
A view of San Francisco Bay, folded from a single square of Satogami paper. This origami painting is not based on any singular image, but a compilation of multiple pictures and my memories from a visit to San Francisco a few years ago.
My point was capturing the spirit more than the detail: the steep hills both around and inside the city, featured prominently in so many car chase scenes in
70’s movies, and of course the Golden Gate Bridge spanning the bay. Transamerica Pyramid is obviously not to scale, but as in Egyptian hieroglyphs, size is about importance, not perspective. Any details missing from the picture are due to the famous San Francisco fog.
A crease pattern for this model should be published in PCOC 2021 convention book this fall.

Maltese Cross Tessellation II
Another approach to the subject of Maltese Cross. The molecule can be tessellated or used on a box as in this picture
(I haven’t folded a multi-molecule @tessellation of this molecule yet).
This design uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule.

Bible
After a book with a face on the cover (called Biography), I designed a book with a
Maltese Cross on the cover (aptly called Bible). This model’s design is based on my
Long Story Short book model. Note that all the pleats radiating from the tessellation molecule are hidden, so both the back cover and the pages are free of any unnecessary creases.

Composition of Squares II
This model is based on Square Pixel Tessellation, and is closely related to my earlier
Composition of Squares I.
I folded this model from a square of thin Unryu paper, and summed up my impressions in Unryu Paper Review.

Butchers’ Guild Coat of Arms
This model started out something completely different that what it ended up being. Originally, I planned to make a model of Lublin Castle, and started with the two axes which decorate its main gate. Then, I thought about adding some more weaponry (hence the shield), and then the design evolved slowly into its final version, a composition resembling a coat of arms of a medieval guild.
The two pictures shown here highlight how much lighting affects a model’s final appearance when photographed. The first picture was taken in direct sunlight: deep shadows hide some detail, but they clearly show the bas-relief-like sculpture and all three-dimensional elements. The second picture was taken in the shade, and the diffuse light arrives at almost all points evenly, visually flattening the image.
Models such as this one, a genre I call origami paintings, pose interesting challenges when you try to classify them.
Traditional tessellations consist of multiple repetitions of the same molecule, so even though the number and arrangement of the molecules can vary each time the models is folded, it is easy to recognize that it’s “the same model”. In a complex composition such as this one, many elements could be used as tessellation molecules independently of each other: I could “extract” a Shield Tessellation, Ox Head Tessellation, Axe Tessellation, etc. from this model, and they could each make an interesting design. I could also create other origami paintings by taking the same elements and arranging them in different ways. Such designs pose important questions about a design’s definition, the border when design becomes another, remixing of elements in order to create something new, and model authorship. Such issues also arise with abstract designs: there are quite a few models which can all be called variants of Fujimoto’s Hydrangea, with varying amount of modification and input from other authors.

Black Framed Heart
A Framed Heart, folded from black Goat Skin paper.

Lucky Star Fractals (10 different colors)
Ten level-3 Lucky Star Fractals, folded from metallic paper in different colors. This is just a small subset of how many times I have folded this model over and over, which is rare since most of my models I only fold one single time.

Shamrock Tessellation 1.1
This is an improved version of my Shamrock Tessellation. It uses Flagstone Paneling technique in order to hide pleats, so that each shamrock is separated from others by empty flat areas. After designing the molecule, I only folded boxes since a complete tessellation is quite a bit of work, but here it is, finally.
Folded from a sheet of Elephant Hide (moss green color).
Together with the paneling, each molecule is 14×14 grid units, and the whole model together with margins uses a 48×48 grid.

Box with Woven Triangles VII
In this variant, the triangles are located in a deeper layer of paper, as if peeking through an opening in a wall.

Square Weave Tessellation

Hydrangea
This is, along with Clover Folding, one of the oldest pictures of a tessellation folded by me
(taken in June 2015).

Clover Folding
Along with the Hydrangea, this is one of the oldest picture of a tessellation folded by me (taken in June 2015).

Clover Folding (blue)
Along with the other Clover Folding model, this is the oldest picture of a tessellation folded by me
(taken in June 2015).

Hydrangea (Prägo Kristall paper)
This is just a simple Hydrangea, designed by Shuzo Fujimoto, but I think it looks really nice in back light.
Folded from Grünperga Kristall Prägo, a kind of textured Glassine paper, very thin and transparent.

Trifora
This kind of tripartite window was a popular motif in sacral architecture, found in many architectural styles, including Romanesque and Gothic.
This model is based on an idea I had a few years ago where the windows had deeper relief and the whole model was three-dimensional. You can spot much simpler designs based on a similar idea in some Building Block Unit variants as well.
The model you see here represents my free-folding style which differs quite a bit from my clean folding style. I use it when designing new models or improvising.
Folded from a sheet of paper I found in my stock. It was together with other Elephant Hide sheets, and it felt like EH during folding, but the pattern differs a little from other sheets of the same color I have. Maybe it’s from a different production batch. The sheet was a 20 cm square, the only one of this size, which also suggests a different source than my other sheets. Maybe I got it from someone?
Happy Easter!

Box with Woven Triangles VI
After a break, I’m back to presenting variants of molecules from the Woven Triangles tessellation series.
Again, it’s a single tessellation molecule used to decorate a box. Now is time for variant VI which you can compare to
Box with Woven Triangles V to see how one is derived from the other by modifying a single outgoing pleat.

Hydrangea from book wrapping foil
Model folded from transparent book wrapping fold which shows the internal structure of the model in an interesting way.
Have a look at the detailed review of this foil as origami paper.

Crowding Butterflies
This model is just a @tessellation of Crossed Box Pleats: the back side which you see here is the Crowding Butterflies model by Shuzo Fujimoto.
You can notice that this model can also be seen as tessellated Hydrangeas (level 1) with reduced inter-molecule spacing.
I folded this model as a base for another tessellation, but I liked it so much I thought it was worth a picture. I think the decorated border I added also adds to the effect.
Folded from one sheet of Ogawa Washi (see my review of this paper).

Clematis Tessellation
My idea behind this tessellation was designing something easy to learn for beginners but at the same to make it reasonably well looking. The models I have used so far for teaching @tessellations to beginners were the Square Twist (optionally modified to become my/Fujimoto’s
Stars and Squares) and my Double Spearhead Tessellation.
Both models have their disadvantages, however: Square Twist may seem simple and obvious once you have some experience with @tessellations, but it’s actually quite confusing to beginners, especially when taught online. Double Spearhead Tessellation is simple enough, but when you fold just 2×2 molecules (which is how much you can fold in a workshop), it doesn’t look that great, and it’s no that easy to get it to lay completely flat, either.
Clematis Tessellation seems to be an improvement over the two former models: it looks nice enough and it seems to be easier to fold than Square Twists.
It starts from a sunk square twist just like Double Spearhead Tessellation. It is quite similar in its structure to Ilan Garibi’s
Red Flower Tessellation, but instead of spread-squashing the triangular flaps, you fold rabbit ears through all the layers.
Shown here are several pictures, some of which may look almost identical. They are images of the front side of the model, taken under different conditions, using different cameras and focal lengths. Looking closer, you should see differences in image quality and how different lenses lead to different perspectives.
The fold shown here uses a 16×16 square grid (4x4 for each molecule).

Woven Triangles Tessellation V
Woven Triangles Tessellation V, folded from Elephant Hide paper. 32×32 grid for the whole model, 8×8 per molecule.

Pythagorean Tiling with 3:2 Ratio
This model is the same as the first Pythagorean Tiling variant I folded, but the side length ratio of big squares to small squares is 3:2 instead of 2:1.
As a matter of fact, this ratio can be arbitrary. You can find a fuller model description at the above link. Model designed independently by myself and several other people.
From 16×16 grid.

Shamrock Tessellation (simplified)
This is a simplified version of my Shamrock Tessellation. I have also designed some boxes that use the same molecule:
Slightly Simplified Shamrock Box and
Simplified Shamrock Box.

2021
This model took me longer than I expected, but better late than never, so: happy New Year 2021! This model uses a new tessellation molecule of mine which
I have called Clematis Tessellation. It is very simple molecule and I noticed it is quite similar to
Ilan Garibi’s Red Flower. Still, making a clean fold with a relatively small grid was quite a bit of work. The sheet is a 2:1 rectangle of
Tant paper (64×32 grid), the second half of the same square whose first half I used to fold my
Trilithon a while ago.
One of the images show what the model looked like before the last step of making a number of rabbit ear folds which generate the Clematis flower shapes.
This raw form also looks interesting and very “Fujimotey”, even though the contrast is lower since the design is completely flat.
In December, I started work on a big project. It’s not an origami model but it’s related to origami. I hope to be able to show the results in a few months.
[update: the project was creating a new version of this web site]

Christ Pantokrator
Christ Pantokrator, inspired by Byzantine icons. One sheet of Edokosome paper, just folding. Merry Christmas!

Edelweiss Box (variant A)
I derived this design from my Shamrock 1.1 Box. Just like the former, it can be tessellated.
It is named after a rare flower which grows in the mountains.

Woven Triangles Tessellation IV
Woven Triangles Tessellation IV — this is the only variant in the series so far which uses a 10×10 grid per molecule rather than just 8×8.
Dirk Eisner calls the kind of twist used in this model a tetrabitriangle twist.
Some time after my publication, Arseniy K. published a design which looks identical
(he used the name Fortune Cookie).

Whirlwind Box
This box is decorated with Whirlwind molecule which can also be used for a @tessellation. Its design is closely related to my
Woven Triangles family, but I gave it a different name since all Woven Triangles variants are flat while this one is 3D and looks best with curved folds.
In the back-lit picture of the precreased sheet, you can clearly see that I made a mistake while precreasing. However, since the two misplaced creases fall inside a pleat, they are not visible at all in the finished model. Despite lots of practice, I do make mistakes while precreasing, but often they do not affect the finished model, or can be made to not affect it by modifying the folding process slightly.

Woven Triangles Tessellation III (Symmetric)
Woven Triangles Tessellation III, the symmetric layout with molecules of two different chiralities.

Woven Triangles Tessellation III (Asymmetric)
Third work in the Woven Triangles series. Just like number I, number III has a pleat arrangement which allows for two distinct molecule layouts: the asymmetric one (shown here) where all molecules have the same rotation, and a symmetric one in which neighbor molecules are mirrored.
Folded from a 30 cm sheet of Elephant Hide paper, Moss Green color (old stock, not produced any more).

Biography
This origami book features a portrait on the front cover, so I called it Biography. The structure of the book is basically the same as in my
Long Story Short but with a tessellation added on the cover. I had the idea of making books with tessellations on the cover shortly after designing the original, but it took me a few years until I was satisfied with the result. As you can see, in this version, the back and pages are completely smooth and there are no unnecessary creases going through them. The technique I used here is quite versatile and can be adapted to many different patterns.

Woven Triangles Tessellation II
Just like all other models in the series, this origami tessellation is derived from
Rectangle and Square Flagstone by applying squash folds in the right places.
Due to the pleat arrangement, this molecule can only be tessellated in the “symmetric” layout where neighbors have opposite chiralities and there is no
“asymmetric” layout which would correspond to Pythagorean Tiling Tessellation.
Each molecule uses an 8×8 grid, for a total of 32×32.

Shamrock 1.1 Box (Refold)
A new fold of my Shamrock 1.1 Box — compared to the previous one, I managed to fold and shape the stem in a cleaner way. The shamrock can be tessellated.

Allegro IPO
Yesterday, my employer, Allegro, went public in what was Poland’s largest IPO so far and Europe’s largest this year. Hopefully, the charts continue growing as in this picture :) Origami @tessellation, single sheet of paper, no cutting or glue, just folding.
This model’s subject is hard to classify: what kind of an object is an abstract visualisation of a stock chart? It’s not a mathematical object like a function plot would be, but since it represents some made-up data and not real values, it’s not figurative origami, either. Data representations such as charts should probably fit somewhere near letters and digits.

Woven Triangles Tessellation I (Asymmetric)
This model uses the same molecule as the symmetric version but all molecules have the same chirality. This causes each row and each column to be shifted by two grid units which results in a different look. In particular,  the model as a whole isn’t square anymore.
From the visible parts of other molecules visible in the close-up picture, you can see that this is the asymmetric molecule arrangement where all molecules have the same chirality.

Woven Triangles Tessellation I (Symmetric)
This is the first model in my Woven Triangles series which you’ve already seen some examples of on boxes.
This tessellation is derived from Rectangle and Square Flagstone and likewise has two possible arrangements of the molecule which result in quite different looks of the finished model. Shown here is the symmetric variant where each pair of neighbor molecules has reversed chirality. I plan to publish the asymmetric variant where all molecules have the same chirality shortly
[update: I did].

Rectangle and Square Flagstone
This origami tessellation is built from the same kind of molecule as Pythagorean Tiling but molecules are arranged differently: in any pair of adjacent neighbors, each has a different direction of rotation (chirality). This different layout results in a significant change to the way the complete model looks.
Designed by myself, and independently by many people before me (see the description of Pythagorean Tiling for some examples; for exactly the same arrangement of molecules, see Madonna Yoder’s version, or the one by Alex Bateman.
This model is the starting point for my Woven Triangles tessellation series.

White Collars
Origami @tessellation, single sheet of Satogami paper. Just folding: no cutting or glue.

Pythagorean Tiling
The pattern this origami tessellation represents is known as Pythagorean Tiling or Two Squares Tessellation.
I came up with this design independently, but it has been known since at least 2003. As far as I can tell, the first to fold it was
Alex Bateman (see his fold). Recently,
Madonna Yoder / gatheringfolds published pictures of a number of related designs as well,
Peter Strouvelle and Alessandra Lamio posted pictures of their versions on Facebook and Tom Crain mentioned him designing this pattern independently as well in a comment on my instagram post.
In this particular fold, the ratio of the sizes of the two squares is equal to 2:1 which results in an elegant pattern and also arises naturally due to the way
I arrived at the pattern by using an 8x8 grid to fold a single molecule. However, all sorts of ratios can be folded, with a very large difference in size on one end of the spectrum, and a ratio of 1:1 which means just a flagstone of equal-sized squares on the other.
The structure of this model is that in each corner of a small square there is a modified twist which connects to a corner of the big square. The result is a flagstone pattern on the front side (the side with the two-square tessellation). In the case of 1:1 ratio, the tessellation is an iso-area flagstone.
There is some similarity in this model’s structure to Momotani’s Wall.
Each molecule uses an 8×8 grid and in the folded model corresponds to one small square plus a one grid unit wide area around it. The molecule can be considered a kind of twist. In this model, all molecules have the same chirality (direction of rotation). It is also possible to connect the same molecules in a different way, with neighbors having opposite rotations.
This results in a flagstone pattern of squares and rectangles.
This model (strictly speaking, its back side) is the starting point for some other variants as well as for the 
Woven Triangles tessellation series.
The precrease pattern you see in one of the pictures is optimized for the front side (the one with squares) to be clean, so each ractangular area visible on the back side still has a crease going through it. The paper used is red Elephant Hide paper, a classic among @tessellation folders, unfortunately no longer produced in this beautiful color.

Triangles (32×32 grid)
Triangles, folded from 32×32 grid. Since the molecule is 8×6 grid units, this leaves one grid unit of margin at the top and at the bottom of the model. You can compare the back side to the back side of Parallelograms to trace their common heritage.

Book with Diamond on Cover
Recently, I gave an Origami Connect workshop on my origami book model Long Story Short. Preparing for the workshop motivated me to revisit an idea which I had several years ago, right after designing the model, namely to design a book whose cover would be decorated with a tessellation-like pattern. I was not happy about my original attempts since either the pleats radiating out of the pattern affected other parts of the model, or I had to severely limit the kind of pattern used.
Fortunately, this time around I was able to design a nice transition between the tessellated part and the area of paper used for folding the back cover and pages. The result is a tessellated cover, and a completely smooth back, as well as no visible creases on the pages of the book, all from a single sheet of paper.
This technique is quite similar to Flagstone Paneling.

Box with Woven Triangles V
Another member of the Woven Triangles family, single tessellation molecule on a box.

Box with Woven Triangles IV
This origami box is decorated with a tessellation molecule from the Woven Triangle family.
In contrast to Woven Triangles I, II, and III, Woven Triangles IV molecule uses a 10×10 grid rather than 8×8.
Dirk Eisner calls the kind of twist used in this model a tetrabitriangle twist.

Box with Woven Triangles III
This is the third tessellation pattern in Woven Triangle family, and it looks good as a single molecule on a box as well.
If you want to learn how to fold it, join me for the World Origami Marathon (OWM).

Box with Woven Triangles II
Another box with a tessellation molecule from the Woven Triangle family.

Box with Woven Triangles XVI
Naming this box, the first in the Woven Triangles family, was a little misunderstanding. I originally labeled it number I since it was the first to be published, and I intended it to be decorated with a molecule of
Woven Triangles Tessellation I. However, I decided to make the walls smoother, which resulted in a slight modification of the molecule. Therefore, I renamed the modified molecule Woven Triangles XIII.
I also folded what I believed to be just a cleaner fold of this design. However, after closer examination, I found out, it was actually a bit different.
So, in the end, I decided to rename this design (the first to be published) Box with Woven Triangles XVI.
Box with Woven Triangles XIII is the version I later folded, and
Box with Woven Triangles I is the one which actually uses the tessellation molecule without any modifications. You can tell the difference between XVI and XIII by looking at the edge between the box’s top and side walls.
Talk about getting lost in my own designs.
I’ve recently had to take some pictures without using a lightbox and this is an example of the issues this causes. This picture was taken in direct sunlight, so the shadows and overall contrast came out too strong. I was able to partially fix this in postprocessing but at the cost of losing some detail elsewhere.
Someone with more experience could certainly have done it better, though. For a change, another picture, which I took in the shade, came out completely flat and uninteresting. This just shows how being able to control lighting is crucial to taking consistently good pictures. Taking pictures outdoors, of origami specifically, adds the frustration of having to watch out for even the slightest breeze potentially blowing the model away. It all makes a good exercise in patience and restraint, though.

Box with Arrangement of Rectangles
Recently, I came up with a family of patterns which result from placing four modified twists around the corners of a rectangle or square. Some variations are flagstone tessellations, others “almost flagstone” tessellations and through modifications, one can arrive at a number of other interesting patterns. Since the family is large and very interesting, it will take me some time until I can neatly fold a reasonable number of models. I will try to post them “in logical order” to show how one leads to the other, which is a different order than I actually fold the models. Obviously, a clean fold takes much more time than an ugly proof-of-concept model.
At least some of these models have been known for a long time. The Pythagorean Tiling aka Two Square
Tessellation which was the starting point of my journey, has independently been designed before me by Alex Bateman and Peter Keller. Quite possibly, by others as well. Recently, Madonna Yoder posted a number of folds which belong to the same family.
This box is decorated with a molecule of one of the pseudo-flagstone patterns which belong to the above-mentioned family of tessellatons.

Groom and Bride
Origami tessellation designed as a wedding gift. One sheet of white Elephant Hide paper, no cutting or glue.

Triangles (16×16 grid)
This origami tessellation is derived from my earlier Parallelograms Tessellation.
By piecing together two symmetric “halves” of a parallelogram, we end up with a triangle. This relation may be even more pronounced when comparing the back sides of these two designs.
Since this tessellation lacks the vertical shift between molecules that Parallelograms have, it was much easier to collapse, and a clean precrease was possible.
Each triangle takes 8×6 grid units. The model shown here is based around a 16×16 grid: actually it should use 16×18 since there are three rows of triangles, but since the lowest two grid units are used for connecting to the next row of molecules, we can skip them when folding the last row.
Based on pre-creasing this particular sheet, I wrote down a few notes on clean precreasing since I think it is an important element of my folding style.

Parallelograms
This is an older design I finally got some time to make a decent fold of (have a look at the prototype from 2017).
I’m pretty sure I’ve seen something very similar or identical to a single molecule
(one parallelogram) made by someone else independently, but I can’t recall where. However, I haven’t seen a @tessellation of those so far.
The pattern of parallelograms with every other one in a row laying either “lower” or “higher” is quite interesting, and it can also be seen as a weave pattern of two sets of strands intersecting at a 45° angle. Each molecule is 8×6 grid units, the whole model uses a 32×32 grid (4×5 molecules and one unit of margin at the top and at the bottom).
With this design, I overestimated my capabilities. I designed and creased a clean pre-crease pattern which would allow the parallelograms to be completely free of any visible crease lines. Then, I found out I was not able to collapse it and had to go back and make a less attractive fold with the complete grid visible. This is the first time it has happened to me. The reason is, I didn’t take into account that the molecules are shifted relative to each other in both horizontal and vertical axes, in contrast to most models where the shift occurs in only one axis. Thus, it is very difficult to collapse the model without having to temporarily make a pleat through other, already collapsed molecules. It might be possible with a larger sheet, and maybe I will try to make a clean fold some time later if time allows. You can recognize the issue by looking at the complete folded model, whose shape is not a rectangle, but a “staggered rectangle” similar to a parallelogram. Update: I managed to make a clean fold from the original precreased sheet in 2022.
There are two different ways to arrange the layers, resulting in slightly different possible looks of the back of this model.

Stars among Hexagons
This origami tessellation is based on a geometric pattern I spotted on a door in the Barcelona Cathedral during my trip back from CfC 2 convention. A design like this is also often found in islamic art
(usually in the form of interwoven lines rather than filled areas) and since this origami version is a rather simple design, I wouldn’t be surprised if it had already been made by someone else before [update: Unravelling Pattern published the same pattern while I was working on mine].
The back side of a single molecule resembles a flower, but since the flowers overlap this is not so obvious in the complete model. There are some pleats on the back side of the model which I could flatten and make the back-lit view of the individual light areas of the tessellation more symmetric, but this would make the back side look worse in normal conditions (reflected light).
Folded from hemp and flax paper hand made by John Gerard, which I reviewed in a separate blog post.

Onion Tessellation
The base for this tessellation is identical to one of the intermediate steps of folding
Lucky Star Tessellation and seems to be something Tomek Siwak also came up with independently. Starting from the base, you just have to pop up the onion/bulb shape.
Looking straight down, you can’t really see that the onions are 3D, but the hexagonal symmetry is emphasized more.

Two-in-One Flower Tessellation
A recent fold of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation. Even though there is only one kind of molecule in this model, depending on which point you treat as the flower’s center, you can see two different kinds of flowers in the pattern.
Model folded from John Gerard’s handmade paper (abaca with cotton). The top-down view highlights the uneven border of this sheet, typical for handmade papers. Such a border gives the folded tessellation a distinctive look (in the case of most figurative models, large parts of the paper edge would be hidden). At the same time, it poses a challenge since the edge can not be used as a reference when folding the model. This is not a big issue if you fold the whole grid, but for folding a clean grid-based model without precreasing unnecessarily visible creases, not being able to use the edge when constructing the precrease can make matters much more difficult.
The close-ups show how the molecules pop up from the tessellation’s plane.
Happy Easter!

Entry to the Fjord
Together with In the Fjord, this is from my Norwegian fjord series of origami works.
Folded from hand-made paper with oatmeal.

Growth 1.1
I recently stumbled upon an older model of mine, Growth Tessellation, in one of my boxes, and I decided to rework it a little. I added just a few touches which can all be summed up as a better arrangement of pleats (symmetric pleats instead of asymmetric and moving one of the pleats to the side by one grid unit). In the process, I saved some paper and was able to cut off a 2 grid unit wide strip of paper on the left side while keeping the original composition of the model. So, here’s the same piece of paper as in the old model, but — in my opinion — improved (and the image is now rotated upside-down since I think this orientation highlights the growth in the central row which I think is more important than the top and bottom rows).

Doom
Doom Eternal is coming out tomorrow, so here’s an origami version of the cover art of the first Doom game from 1993.
Origami from a single square sheet, no cutting or glue. The paper is Grainy from Origami Shop — I plan to write a longer review when time allows but in brief, it made a good impression, and I think the texture is a good fit for this model.

Composition of Squares I
This model is based on a simple technique which I used also in Growth and
Square Pixel Tessellation models. Other interesting arrangements, with more or less symmetry, can be achieved as well.
I folded this model from a square of Shadow-Fold paper which I got from
Naomiki Sato and I though the paper was worth a review, so I wrote one.

Excalibur
Excalibur, the sword in the stone, from Arthurian legends. Origami folded from one sheet
(Elephant Hide paper courtesy of Paula Versnick). Also compare my
Two Swords model which uses the same molecule, though with different shaping.

Greek Cross Flagstone Tessellation
This origami tessellation was inspired by a pavement pattern I noticed some time ago in my home city of Lublin, Poland, at the old cemetery and in the open-air museum. I must credit Robin Scholz for the inspiration to take a closer look at patterns I see on floors and ceilings wherever I go. Robin himself also recently published pictures of a similar pattern.
It took me more than half a year until I could find the time to get this model to its final form, i.e. design the precrease pattern for a clean fold
(without showing fragments of the grid) and then to actually fold it. This model is tricky since when you look at a single cross, it has a 90° symmetry.
However, the pattern as a whole does not have such a symmetry, only 180° symmetry. As you see, the crosses are arranged in rows, and rotating the whole pattern by 90° does not result in the same pattern as in the beginning. This means that a single cross has the 90° symmetry, but the tessellation molecule does not since it contains not just one cross, but a cross and fragments of its neighbors. This surprising symmetry is visible in the most striking way on the back side.
Such untypical symmetry confused me at first since when I was trying to reproduce this pattern in origami, I tried to give it a 90° symmetry, which was bound to fail. Only after I realized the difference between a single cross and a complete molecule, could I proceed with the design. I think this is the first time I ran into such a situation. I find it very interesting and probably there are more patterns like this to explore.
Seen at an angle, the model actually looks like flagstones in a paved path. You can also see how thick this tessellation is despite there being only few layers of paper: the twists that separate individual crosses from each other are quite springy and with stiff paper, they give the model a lot of body.
Strictly speaking, this model is not a pure flagstone tessellation since there are some single pleats (on the crosses). This is unavoidable for shapes with reflex angles, such as the crosses here, so my way of looking at it is to call this a flagstone tessellation in the sense that the crosses form a flagstone, and the single pleats on the crosses don’t count since they are just a way of constructing those polygons with reflex angles.
The back side of the model highlights the symmetry of the molecule: while a single cross seen on the front side has a 90° rotation symmetry, the molecule has only 180° symmetry due to the way the crosses are laid out on the plane and how molecules have to connect to each other.
One of the pictures shows the sheet of Khepera paper from which the model was folded, precreased and ready to collapse. I prefer to precrease my models without folding the whole grid. It takes more time this way, but results in a much better looking model.
I folded this model from Khepera paper, one of may favorites for models like this, and wrote a review of the paper.

Radioactive Tessellation II
This model is derived from my Radioactive Tessellation by adding a triangular frame around the radioactivity symbol. This change also makes it possible to shape the symbol within the frame better. Due to the much higher complexity, I only folded a single molecule so far.
The back-lit image shows the whole model rather than just the center so that you can see the pleats and the edges of the sheet.

In the Fjord
View into a Norwegian fjord, folded from a sheet of hand-made paper.

Epiphany IV
This rendition of the Star of Bethlehem is based on the same general idea as Epiphany III, but made to better resemble an actual comet. It features a double tail, and the nucelus is an irregular lump rather than a star symbol. I folded this model from Materica Kraft paper (120 gsm) for my origami exhibition at Olsztyn Planetarium.

2020
Happy New Year 2020! Here’s an origami tessellation with the number 2020, folded from a 2:1 rectangle of Satogami paper.

Two Hearts Framed
I designed this model as a wedding gift, starting out from my Framed Heart model.
Due to the two hearts’ proximity, the collapse is rather difficult. This pattern can be tessellated, but a single framed molecule was already quite challenging.
It gets easier if the whole grid is precreased, but that results in the grid being visible on the hearts and the background. I am generally quite happy about this model except for the lock which holds the final crease which brings one heart on top of the other: there are too many layers of paper in that area, and I was not able to fold this part in a completely neat way. While it’s not obvious in the picture, the many layers cause the center of the model to buckle instead of staying flat.

Radioactive Tessellation I
A recent design of mine, this tessellation is relatively simple to fold, but the end result looks quite interesting. On the back side, I used some modified twists in order to give the layers on the front side the desired ordering. The hexagons at the centers of trefoils can be shaped to look like circles, but I skipped this step, going for a more classical, jagged form.
See also: Radioactive Tessellation II.

Crucifix
This origami crucifix is modeled after icon crosses found in Byzantine art, but also present in other styles up to this day. A matching model for All Saints’ Day, even though I’m not quite happy about this fold. The background is rather messy because I used too small a sheet and skipped some of the precreasing (details in the paper review link below).
I folded this model with Korean Hanji paper which had been on my waiting list for some time, and I prepared a review of this paper type.

Woven Parallelograms Tessellation
I derived this design from my older Double Spearhead Tessellation. The name comes from the pattern on the front side.
On the other hand, the back side is probably more interesting. It has no parallelograms but instead it is an almost-flagstone @tessellation of interwoven rhombi and squares. Together with the back-lit view, it also makes this model’s relation to Double Spearhead Tessellation more apparent than the front.
This model is folded from Goat Skin paper, and I used the opportunity to write a review.

Box with Decorated Maltese Cross
Box with a heavily stylized Maltese Cross. The molecule can be tessellated or used on a box as in this picture.
This design uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule.

Titanic
The sinking of Titanic, in origami.
When folding this model, I reviewed the Awagami Ogura paper (75 gsm) it is folded from.

Star of David Tessellation II
This tessellation is derived from Lucky Star Tessellation, but due to the different arrangement of paper layers, this one can’t be fractalized. The outline of the molecule looks just like the former model, but the apparent two equilateral triangles inside make it look more like a Star of David than when the inside is composed of six rhombi.
This is the first time I folded Leathac Rouketsu paper and I wrote a dedicated paper review.

Twisted Bird Base Fractal
This is a recursion of my Twisted Bird Base Tessellation.
The recursive / fractal version looks interesting, but it’s rather hard to collapse.
I think I saw somewhere on the internet a picture of a very similar or even identical tessellation molecule designed independently by o’sorigami.

Heart Tessellation II
This model uses an improved version of my Broken Heart Molecule.
I call this version simply Heart Tessellation II / Molecule (II because of a Heart Tessellation I designed earlier).
Improvements include: better proportions, not only the molecule but also its crease pattern being square, and a convenient grid size: the heart itself uses a 14×14 grid, so a 16×16 grid results in the heart surrounded by one grid unit of margin.
Since I have not yet folded a multi-molecule model, the picture is that of Framed Heart, a model based on a single molecule of this tessellation.

Framed Heart
This model uses an improved version of my Broken Heart Molecule.
I call this version simply Heart Tessellation II / Molecule.
Improvements include: better proportions, not only the molecule but also its crease pattern being square, and a convenient grid size: the heart itself uses a 14×14 grid, so a 16×16 grid results in the heart surrounded by one grid unit of margin. By adding another 8 grid units for the frame, we end up with a 24×24 grid for the framed heart. This molecule can also be tessellated.
In another fold, you can also see the back side of this model.

Box with Maltese Cross II
Another approach to the subject of Maltese Cross. The molecule can be tessellated or used on a box as in this picture.
This design uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule.

Box with Maltese Cross I
An origami box featuring the heraldic Maltese Cross. The molecule is based on the one used in
Maltese Cross Framed and a slight variation of the one used in
Cross Pattee Tessellation. Just as the tessellation, the box also uses my
Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule.

Two Swords / Dwa Miecze
Model ten zaprojektowałem po niedawnej wizycie na polu Bitwy pod Grunwaldem. Origami z jednego arkusza papieru, bez cięcia i klejenia. 
Siatka 48×48. Pojedynczy miecz można potraktować jako molekułę tesselacji i połączyć w jednym modelu dowolną ich liczbę.
I designed this model after my recent visit to the battlefield of Grunwald, one of the largest battles of the Middle Ages.
Origami from a single sheet of paper, no cutting or glue. 48×48 grid. A single sword can be treated as a tessellation molecule, so any number of those can be combined in a single model. It should also be possible to arrange the molecules differently, for example have a line of swords, some of which would point up and some down, or possibly even arrange them in a circular fashion (thanks for the suggestion, arsenikoom).

Frank’s Bow Tie (as I would fold it)
Another fold of Frank’s Bow Tie, this time in my usual style (thick paper, as few grid lines visible as is practical). The link contains more information about the model (inspired by Frank van Kollem’s work) and it shows a fold in a style imitating his.

Frank’s Bow Tie (as Frank van Kollem might have folded it)
At Outdoor Origami Meeting 2019, I had the opportunity to fold Frank Van Kollem’s Pythagoras Tree tessellation in a workshop given by Paula Versnick. I had known some of his other designs before, but this was the first time I actually folded any of his models. The model you see here is my design based on the technique found in van Kollem’s Pythagoras Tree and a kind of homage to his creative work.
I don’t know if he actually ever wore bow ties, but somehow I feel it might have matched his personality. Folding this model, I also tried to imitate
Frank van Kollem’s folding style: plain paper and a fully precreased grid with all diagonals. I later folded the same model folded in my own style, for contrast.
For this fold, I chose Fedrigoni Splendorgel Extra White 100 gsm paper and wrote a paper review.

Lucky Star Fractal (level 7)
This is a level-7 Lucky Star Fractal, the largest number of levels I folded so far.
I folded this model from a hexagon cut out from a B1 sheet of Fabriano Palatina paper (70 gsm) and updated my older review of this paper with new information.

Souvenir of the Sea (Box)
Making a tessellation representing boats on the sea had been on my mind for quite some time when I finally came up with this design. It represents not just any boat, but the origami paper boat, a simple model which probably almost everyone has folded as a child.
Perhaps we should introduce the term meta-origami for origami which represents other origami?
Here, the molecule is placed on a box, but it can also be tessellated.

Spider’s Web
Ben Goldberger is an interesting origami artist from Israel whom I had the opportunity to meet at CDO Convention 2018.
You should definitely check out his work, especially if you are interested in recursive, fractal-like models. One of his models which I really liked is this spider on a web, which combines geometric and figurative origami.
I used this model to test a sheet of paper which is sold by IKEA under the name Givande and which I got my hands on courtesy of Aleksander Biestek. You can read the resulting paper review on my blog

Box with Cross Pattee IV
An origami box featuring the heraldic Cross Pattee. This model uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule. This variant is a modification of Cross Pattee I. molecule.

Box with Cross Pattee III
An origami box featuring the heraldic Cross Pattee. This model uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule. In contrast to Cross Pattee I and II molecules, this one represents the shape as a completely flat pattern.

Box with Cross Pattee II
An origami box featuring the heraldic Cross Pattee. This model uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule. While Cross Pattee I molecule shows the cross in bas-relief, Cross Pattee II represents the same shape in sunk relief.

Box with Cross Pattee I
An origami box featuring the heraldic Cross Pattee.I used the same molecule in Cross Pattee Tessellation, and just as the tessellation, the box also uses my Flagstone Paneling technique in order to achieve a completely clean space around the molecule.

Lucky Star Fractal Tessellation
This is a @tessellation of the Lucky Star Fractal. The standalone star was designed independently by several people, starting with Shuzo Fujimoto. I don’t know if Fujimoto considered tesselating this design, but I wouldn’t be surprised if he did. Independently, Halina Rościszewska-Narloch (Haligami), designed her Day and Night Tessellation which is practically the same as this model folded up to stage one, though she also experimented with creating the fractalized version. You can find my fold of the non-fractal version of the tessellation under the name Lucky Star Tessellation.
In this model, I folded the Closed-Back Variant, so the back side looks the same regardless of how many levels of the fractal are folded on the front side.
However, the triangular flaps could be opened in a flower-like fashion, in which case the number of concentric petal rings would depend on the fractal’s level
(see Lucky Star Fractal (Open Back) for a single-molecule example).
Folding this model, I found out some interesting things about Tant paper, which I summarized in
Notes on Tant Paper along with a few remarks about collapsing this model.

Braided Pinwheel Tessellation
This tessellation comes in two molecule variants. Despite being a kind of twist, molecules can be made to turn left or right independent of each other, i.e. neighbors do not need to be mirror images of each other. Both variants are folded from the same base, based on a 6×6 square grid.
Variant A is the one with narrower blades (molecules located around the perimeter of the model) while variant B is the one with shorter, stubby blades
(molecules located in the center of the model). Later I also designed variant C which looks like a combination of A and B.
Update: it seems variant B is identical to Meenakshi Mukerji’s Little Jasmine Tessellation.
I used this model to test Biogami paper which I got interested in after seeing Nicolas Terry’s penguin folded from it.
You can find my review in this blog post.
The side view shows this paper’s thickness and how well such thick paper works for this particular model, giving the molecules a 3D look.

Simple Woven Rhombi Box
A simple origami box, based on my Woven Rhombi Tessellation. Folded from a sheet of unique paper with a subtle floral motif, whose name I do not know.

John Lackland Tessellation
I derived this model from Her Majesty’s Tessellation by removing most of the free spaces (“land”) between molecules. Each molecule is still 6×6 grid units. Folded from the rare red Elephant Hide paper.
Some time after designing this model, I came to the conclusion that Shuzo Fujimoto was probably the first to come up with this design. His original books often show only back-lit pictures of tessellations, and in low quality, which makes it difficult to tell for sure how a design is structured. At first, I thought some pictures show this very design. After looking at them in more detail, I became convinced that they actually show a design identical to Ilan Garibi’s Red Flower Tessellation. However, there is a design shown right next to that one which looks like John Lackland Tess but with an extra petal fold on each petal of the “flower”. This shape can’t be achieved starting directly from Red Flower, so now I think that Fujimoto did not publish John Lackland as a separate design, but must have arrived at it as an intermediate stage while folding that design. If you’re interested, the pictures in question can be found in Twist Origami I (page 33) and Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami (pages 163 and 165).
[Update]: After all, I think Fujimoto may have arrived at this pattern, but it’s far from certain. The design which is to be found in his books, mentioned above, CFW 55, uses a petal fold, and there is no picture of a version with just a flat valley fold.
Given that when I came up with John Lackland tess, I did not think of using a petal fold, I assume the same for Fujimoto but the other way around. He may have had the idea, but unless there is some proof he actually had, it would be just speculation to assume so.
After my publication, the same design appeared under the name Flower in the square on folduction’s Instagram channel.

Shamrock 1.1 Box
Just in time for St. Patrick’s Day, here is a new version of my Shamrock Box (previous versions: 1.0 and two simplified variants).
Current version was designed so that it can be used together with my Flagstone Paneling technique which results in a nice and clean area between the molecules. A consequence was that I had to redesign the stem, but I think I ended up with a better one than in the original. Just as the original, this molecule can be used for a tessellation or for a box as in the picture shown here.

Lucky Star Tessellation
This is a @tessellation of the molecule which I first used in Lucky Star Box and which I later extended into
Lucky Star Fractal. As I learned after the fact, the fractal version of the molecule had been independently designed by several others before me, starting with Shuzo Fujimoto.
Halina Rościszewska Narloch (Haligami) called her version Day and Night Tessellation since one side resembles stars and the other one suns.
I folded this model from a sheet of blue, hand-made abaca and flax paper created by John Gerard paperworks. You can find my review in a separate blog post.

Lucky Star Fractal (Open Back)
This model is a variant of the Lucky Star Fractal (aka Logarithmic Star), designed by myself and independently by many others before me, starting with Shuzo Fujimoto (see the description of regular version for more information). In this variant, the front looks the same, but the back is opened into a flower-like shape which resembles
Floral Perpetua by Dasa Severowa.
This was the first time I folded Edokosome paper which I bought at CDO convention: have a look at the blog post with my review.

Flagstone Paneling of Cross Pattee Tessellation
This origami tessellation, hand-folded from a single sheet of Biotope paper, without any cutting or glue, demonstrates my new approach to cleanly separating the individual molecules. I’ve been working on this idea for some time — being able to fold a tessellation where the areas between molecules would be flat and “at the same level” as the tessellation molecules themselves (flagstone-style). This does not always happen by itself since there are often pleats going out from the four sides of the molecule which lie above other layers and thus the areas between molecules are not of uniform thickness. One typical group are molecules with a pleat I call the “SZ pleat”, folded from an 8×8 grid to form a 4×4 molecule whose side pleat looks like the letters SZ from the side (2-1-2-1-2: two units to the right, one to the left, two to the right, one to the left, two to the right).
This group includes, among others: Fujimoto’s Hydrangea, Garibi’s Red Flower and my
Shamrock Tessellation (Simplified).
I derived this idea from an older design of mine, Big and Small Squares which has transitions between squares with a side of 4 units, and those with sides 2 units long. A similar gadget is used on each side of the square molecule in Flagstone Paneling.
This can be thought of as a kind of level shifter. Recently, Robin Scholz has been exploring a family of designs derived from Frank Van Kollem’s ideas which he calls Versatility and which seem to be based on a similar concept as this model.
The main goal of this model is to demonstrate Flagstone Paneling in action. It works with many different molecules, and it is also possible to create variants for pleat types other than the 2-1-2-1-2 “SZ pleat”, for example for the the 1-1-4-1-1 pleat found in my
Two-in-one Flower Tessellation. For this particular fold, I used my Cross Pattée Tessellation molecule which you can find for example in my older model, Coat of Arms of Rzeszów.
That model nicely demonstrates what the tessellation looks like with regular pleats. The paneling also works well for boxes (pictures coming up) and gives them an elegant look without any unnecessary creases.
Together with the paneling, each molecule is 14×14 grid units, and the whole model together with margins uses a 44×44 grid.
While the most interesting part of this model is the front which shows how individual tessellation molecules can be separated from each other by areas of completely flat and uniform paper, the back side also looks quite interesting and reveals some of the twists which are used for modifying the width of pleats where the molecules transition into the paneling.
Edward Mistretta uses a similar construction in a recursive way in some of his Phantasma Fractal variants.

Dodecagons
In this tessellation, I used the same technique of doubling the number of a polygon’s sides as in Sad Octagons, this time making dodecagons from hexagons.
The paper I used was bought by a friend in China. I think it should be classified as Thai Unryu but lacking any sheet confirmed to be Thai Unryu for comparison, I may be wrong. You can see the large Kozo fibers, but this paper was much thicker than the regular
Unryu I know, and while relatively soft, could be precreased and collapsed without any treatment.

Blazing Propellers Tessellation Molecule (30×30 grid)
An extended version of my Blazing Propellers molecule, folded from 30×30 grid (32×32 for complete model with margin) rather than the standard 14×14 grid.

Still Life with Epiphany III
Another attempt at folding the subject of Star of Bethlehem, this time using the Lucky Star molecule
(invented independently with Fujimoto, Haligami and many others).
In order to fold this model cleanly, I devised a non-standard method of constructing the 60 degree angle — slightly less precise than the classical methods used in folding a hexagon from a rectangle or from a square, but leaving no marks behind (if the paper is flexible enough).
Epiphany III is, obviously, the big model in the center. The one on the left is Just Stars and the one on the right is Maltese Cross.
I had some doubts on how to classify this model: the star is a tessellation molecule, but the model as a whole is not even though it is flat and looks like a tessellation at first glance. Maybe I should consider the tail a kind of decorated frame around the tessellation?
This is a large model, folded from an almost complete B1 sheet of Fabriano Accademia 120 gsm paper which I found at a local art supply store. You can read my review in a separate blog post.

Christmas Tree 2018
Unintuitive as it may seem, this tessellated Christmas Tree was born as a modification of a shooting star model, Epiphany III.
The molecule used for creating the jagged edges of the tree can probably also be combined in other ways to create new shapes. The star at the top is based on the Lucky Star molecule.
I used this model for testing out Vintage paper.

Lucky Star Fractal (level 3)
A level-3 fold of Lucky Star Fractal, this time from gray metallic paper.
I rarely fold a model multiple times, but this particular model is so nice I have folded literally dozens of pieces in different colors. A hexagon cut from an A4 sheet is the perfect size for a level 3 model.

Lucky Star Fractal
This is a recursive version of the Lucky Star molecule. Just like the non-recursive version, it can be tessellated or used for decorating a box. The back of this model when folded standalone rather than tessellated can either be closed or it can be opened and some extra flaps folded up which results in a pattern resembling a flower.
Despite this not being the first time around this model is invented (see below), I’m really happy with it. The collapse is rather difficult at first, but with some practice it becomes quite pleasant, especially if you only fold up to level 3 (the one in the picture is level 5, folded from a 35 cm sheet of Edokosome paper). The scaling factor is √3 which means that the levels shrink quite rapidly, and a large sheet is needed to go many levels deep. After 4 iterations, this molecule is reduced by a factor of 9, compared to just a factor of 4 for the
Hydrangea whose scaling factor is √2. Also, due to this model’s construction, folding levels deeper than 3 requires reaching through multiple already collapsed layers which is difficult and nigh-impossible without the help of a folding tool. However, a level 3
Lucky Star Fractal can be folded from a hexagon cut from an A4 sheet and it is quite quick to fold, compared to many of my other models. I rarely fold a model more than once, but the level 3 version of this star I have folded many times over since it makes a nice decoration and after some learning, is a real pleasure to fold.
While I came up with this design myself, due to some research I performed after designing the regular Lucky Star, I learned that others have designed the same model before me. Haligami (Halina Rościszewska-Narloch) played with a recursive version of her
Day and Night Tessellation, which is almost exactly the same model as this one (only the locking of the rays in the last level is different).
Shuzo Fujimoto designed this model even earlier — I was able to identify it thanks to some pictures posted by Eric Gjerde who reproduced the model based on a CP found in a book.
We don’t know what name Fujimoto used — Gjerde used the name Logarithmic Star. A few other people (e.g. Andrew Hudson
— see this comment and
Aneta Origami – this comment) have also come up with this idea independently.
There are also a number of models which differ from this one, but still exhibit a number of similarities, either in the look of the finished model or in the way it is constructed. Melisande designed Star Unlimited a la Fujimoto which looks the same on the front side but has a different back and a different CP. The general construction is similar to Blooming Fractal Flower by Joanna Sobczyk.
In the open-back variant, the back side resembles Floral Perpetua by Dasa Severova.
There is also Double and Triple Fractal Star by Monika Hanková and their variant by Endre Somos.
Given how elegant this model is, I am surprised that it has not reached the popularity of Fujimoto’s Hydrangea. I have taught this model at several conventions, and I try to promote it where possible so that it becomes as well known as I think it deserves.

Unripe Sunflower Tessellation
This is a modification of my Sunflower Tessellation. The molecules (“sunflower seeds”) are flatter and the petals are shorter. The back side is also more interesting than in the regular version.

Blazing Propellers Tessellation (Elephant Hide Paper)
Another fold of my Blazing Propellers Tessellation, this time 4×4 molecules (64×64 grid).

Twist Again Tessellation
This origami tessellation combines elements from some of my other models. While reading Robert Lang’s @tessellation book, I realized that many molecules can be viewed as kinds of twists even if they do not look like twists at first glance. Such is the case also with this model and hence the name.
This fold was also an opportunity to test Lokhu paper.

Study of Lucca Cathedral in Origami
A quick study of Lucca cathedral as an origami tessellation on my way to the Italian CDO convention.

Sunflower Tessellation (3×3) with Molecule Variants
This model shows how the basic molecule of my Sunflower Tessellation can be modified in order to rearrange the direction the individual “seeds” are pointing. I also went with a more basic shaping, leaving the leaves straight rather than curling them.
This was also my first use of Yohishi (Bear Hide) paper and I wrote a review of this paper.

Lucky Star Box (Simplified)
This is a model I will be teaching in just two weeks at a workshop during the 2018 CDO origami convention in Italy. The star can be used as a tessellation molecule. After designing it, I learned that the molecule is structurally almost the same as Day and Night Tessellation by Haligami.
I designed this box as a modification of my Lucky Star Box, specifically with teaching in mind.
Compared to the original version, this one uses a more convenient 8×8×8 grid rather than 12×12×12, and even if the whole grid is precreased, there are no unnecessary grid lines visible on the walls of the finished model.
This was also a test of Fedrigoni Splendorgel Avorio 100 gsm paper which I discovered at a local PaperConcept store: read the full review here.

Sunflower Tessellation (Refold)
It took me 1½ years before I decided to fold my Sunflower Tessellation once again, this time from  rare yellow Elephant Hide paper. I think this is a better fold, in part thanks to using paper better suited for this kind of model and to using a larger sheet.
The last image shows the precreased sheet, right before collapsing. The precrease and crease pattern are based on a 40×40 grid (5×6 for the molecules and 2×5 for the leaves).

Rhombus Fractal
Rhombus Fractal, an origami tessellation designed by Endre Somos (and independently also by Joel Cooper and by Wei Fu), folded by me. You may also find interesting a discussion of this design by Robin Scholz.
In all the folds I have seen so far, only a single molecule was folded, but I’m pretty sure that these molecules can be tessellated by forming helper triangle twists from the triangles that protrude from the hexagon’s corners.

Mini Sunflower (Kaiser paper)
Mini-Sunflower Tessellation, folded from Kaiser (Stark) paper.

Stacked Propellers Tessellation
A refold of my older design, Stacked Propellers Tessellation, this time as a complete tessellation rather than a single molecule. 64×64 grid.

Sad Octagons
This model uses a technique I came up with recently, which makes it possible to double the number of sides of any regular polygon when it is used as the central polygon of a specific kind of twist. Here it is used to make octagons out of squares, but it also works with hexagons and other polygons. By leaving some of the sides unchanged, other shapes visible in this model can be created.

Spread-Sunk Square Twist Tessellation (Rhino Hide paper)
A new fold of my older model, with slightly different angles.
As the name says, the molecule is a square twist with spread-sinks in the corners of the central square.
This was my first use of Kinumomi paper (also known as Rhinoceros Hide / Rhino Hide): read the review here.

Phantasma Fractal Variant
This is my variant of Edward Mistretta’s model, Phantasma Fractal. It’s a nice design which can be folded as a single molecule, or tessellated.

Lucky Star Box
Origami box with Lucky Star molecule. The molecule can be tessellated and is based on hexagonal 8×8×8 grid.
I called it this way because I was happy about this design which I find quite elegant. Even though I have seen some similar ideas (e.g. by Alessandro Beber and Peter Keller), I wasn’t able find proof of anyone creating exactly the same design before, so if it really is new, I will feel lucky to have found it.
If I do learn of someone folding it before, I will still feel lucky to have reinvented it.
Update: I learned that the molecule is structurally almost the same as Day and Night Tessellation by Haligami, the only difference being how the rays of the star are locked. Thanks to Tomek Czunko for pointing this out.
In order to make teaching at conventions easier, I also designed a simplified version of this box.

Flow
A tessellation derived from my other model, Woven Rhombi. 4×4 grid units per molecule, or 8×8 if you want to consider a complete hexagonal tile a molecule.
Flow Tessellation is iso-area: when you look at the back side, you see exactly the same pattern, rotated 90 degrees. Due to the arrangement of paper layers,
I had to resolve to wet folding to make the model flat and to prevent the layers from unfolding.
This was the first time I folded Biotope paper, and I wrote down my observations in a review.

Double-Bottom Double Spearhead Tessellation
A modification of my earlier design, Double Spearhead Tessellation. Due to the double bottom with more paper layers, this model doesn’t look as nicely back-lit as the source model.
The molecule uses just a 6×6 grid, but there are quite a few layers. The sheet was 24 cm, so with 4·6 = 24 divisions plus some margin around, the grid unit was probably 8 mm or so.
This was my first fold using Kaiser paper, sold by Origami Shop under the name of Stark: have a look at my review.

Wedge Flower Box (hexagonal)
A hexagonal variant of my Wedge Flower Box. Due to the different angles than in square grid, petals do not automatically align in a nice way, so they have to be pushed up for non-flat shaping like in this fold, or slightly modified to overlap and lie flat.

Box with Wedge Flower Variant
This box is decorated with a variant of my Wedge Flower molecule in which the central part is flat.
Folded from Textured Paper from BOS Supplies.

Wedge Flower Box
Origami box decorated with a molecule of my Wedge Flower Tessellation. Folded from
Via Felt 100 gsm paper stained with tea using a technique developed by my brother, Paweł Kosmulski. It requires a very strong tea essence which you can apply to the paper using various tools. Here, cup edges were used to create circles.

Wedge Flower Tessellation
A new tessellation design of mine, 8×8 square grid per molecule. Awagami Kozo Natural Select paper courtesy of Melina Hermsen.
Since this was my first fold using this paper, I wrote a short review.

Ridges Corrugation (32×32 grid)
A larger fold of my Ridges Corrugation, folded from a 32×32 grid. Folded from the big grid, the model curls up more than the 16×16 version and can be used as a stylish ornament resembling a bowl. You can also clearly see the curvature in the picture showing a close-up of the back side.

Box with Star of David
A recent design of mine, a box with the Star of David, seen from the top. Folded from a single sheet of Tant paper without cuts or glue. The star can be tessellated.
It was quite challenging to fold this model cleanly (without unnecessary creases visible in the model), so I plan to use it as an example of my clean folding technique during the Origami Outdoor Meeting in Kraków, Poland, this June.
The model is a bit older but, I found today to be a good date for publishing it since it is the 75th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.
After designing the tessellation molecule, I found a very similar idea used before by Christine in her Angel Tessellation.
However, her molecules do not lie flat which makes the stars less clearly visible. Apparently, my model is also very similar to Eric Gjerde’s tessellation called Negative Space Stars: the stars are formed in essentially the same way but the space between them has fewer pleats in my model.

Star Interlace Tessellation
This is a design derived from my Square Interlace Tessellation. A more precise name would be
Pursed Square Interlace Tessellation but I found it too technical and went with Star Interlace Tessellation instead.
6×6 grid units per molecule, 32×32 grid for the whole model together with margin.
Washi paper courtesy of Satoko Saito.

Latin Cross Tessellation
An origami tessellation for Good Friday. The basic structure of the Latin cross is based on Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea and could easily be modified to have different proportions, e.g. a Greek cross. I used the same pleat-reversing widget as in my
Shamrock Tessellation.
This is the first model I folded from Nepalese Lokta paper, nad I wrote a short review.

Her Majesty’s Tessellation (64×64)
This is Her Majesty’s Tessellation (own design) folded from a 64×64 diagonally rotated grid.
The spacing between molecules is less dense than in the 32×32 grid-based version in order to match the different grid size.
Original pictures of this model, taken in 2018, were of not-so-great quality, so I later reshot the model in 2020 using a better camera: that’s why multiple pictures show the same view. Since the model spent the two years in between hanging in a frame on my wall, you can also see how the shaping has changed by itself, with the molecules opening up more. This change could be temporarily reversed if needed by flattening the model under a heavy weight.

Sharpened Square Interlace Tessellation
Sharpened Square Interlace Tessellation, a simple variant of my Square Interlace Tessellation.
As in the original version, each molecule uses a 6×6 grid. Folded from John Gerard’s handmade paper (flax and Manila hemp).

Houstonia Box
This origami box represents a flower of the genus Houstonia, also known as bluets or Quaker Ladies. Some species, in particular Houstonia Caerulea have four petals which is relatively rare among flowers. However, it is very convenient for the origamist who wants to fold from a square.
The flower can also be tessellated, with each molecule taking up a 12×12 grid. After designing it, I found a similar model by Ilan Garibi, called Criss Cross Tessellation, but as you see, in my model the center of the flower is locked together while in Ilan’s, both ends of each petal are free.

Dune Flower
A different arrangement of the same molecule as in my Dune Tessellation.
Some other arrangements are also possible with a bit of tweaking.
Folded from a sheet of Elephant Hide paper onto which traces of newspaper print were copied by sticking a wet newspaper page to the sheet and removing it after drying.
This particular arrangement was also independently designed by Faateh Khan.

Her Majesty’s Tessellation (copper color)
Another fold of Her Majesty’s Tessellation. Folded from Elephant Hide paper, painted with copper-color acrylic paint.

Ridges Corrugation (Citrus Crush paper)
A different fold of Ridges Corrugation. The back-lit view shows how the corrugation folded from a square ends up a rhombic shape.

Patched Square Interlace Tessellation
A slightly modified variant of my Square Interlace Tessellation.

Epiphany Tessellation
An origami tessellation for the Feast of Epiphany. Single sheet of Gampi paper, no cutting or glue.
Wet folding was used for the coma of the Stars of Bethlehem / comets.
This tessellation waited almost a year between the start of precreasing and final collapse. During that time, I reworked the design and was able to simplify it without affecting visual quality. The molecule uses just a 6×6 grid. The base is quite simple: all fun lies in the shaping.
The models which led to this design are: Epiphany II, designed two years ago, and Box with Shooting Star of 1½ years ago.

Happy 2018!
Happy New Year 2018! This is the first fold of my recent idea for making pixel tessellations, called Butterfly Pixel Tessellation. The molecule is basically
Shuzo Fujimoto’s Crowding Butterflies. Flaps can be lifted and folded in half in order to set a pixel into “on” state. Note that each square pixel is divided diagonally into two subpixels whose state can be set independently. This makes it possible to use subpixel rendering, a technique used on most modern computer and mobile device displays to enhance their apparent resolution. This allows for more detail than other molecules which use the same 3×3 grid per pixel such as the Four-Sink-Base or Crossed Box Pleat (CBP).

Nativity
Nativity — origami tessellation folded from a single square of Tant paper. Merry Christmas!

Monument Valley Corrugation
This is my Monument Valley Corrugation, squeezed inside Predictable Box which I designed for this very purpose.
The back side of the corrugation is less interesting than the front but has nice balance and symmetry nonetheless.
Both the box and the corrugation are each folded from a single square of Tant paper of the same size.
The box is needed since without it the paper’s springiness would cause the corrugation to unfold and curl, as can be seen in the picture of the model during collapse, before it was fully squeezed into final shape.
This model is closely related to Dune Flower Tessellation. You can practically read the CP off the last picture.

Dune Tessellation
A new design of mine, Dune Tessellation (long slit variant).
I came up with this model when looking for new ways to create pixel-based pictures with tessellations. Individual dunes can be used as “on” pixels, and a matching flat molecule (not used here) can be used for “off” pixels. The pixels are not square but this makes them more interesting. One pattern which is an obvious choice for triangular pixels is Sierpiński’s Triangle.
A disadvantage of this design is that the dunes create lots of tension in the paper and in practice collapsing the model and having it stay that way is quite hard. Using Tant paper, which is springy but not the most springy, I had to resort to wet folding to get the model into shape. Fortunately, there is a short slit variant which promises to stay in collapsed state with less effort on the folder’s part.
Dune Flower shows a different way of arranging the same kind of molecules.

Shark Teeth Corrugation (blue Elephant Hide)
Another fold of Shark Teeth Corrugation, this time from rare blue Elephant Hide paper.
One of the images shows how to construct the precrease.

Ridges Corrugation
A new origami corrugation of mine. The model tends to curve slightly but in this case it actually makes it more interesting rather than being an issue.
You can see how it curls best in the view from the front.
This model is from a 16×16 grid. In another fold you can see the structure of the model in a back-lit image. Later, I folded this corrugation from a larger grid so you can compare with this smaller version.

Clover Folding (Fujimoto) and Lookalike (Kosmulski) side by side
A side-by-side comparison of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Clover Folding (left) and my own
Clover Folding Lookalike (right). Front and back sides are shown (top and bottom row, respectively).
You can see the similarities and the differences, especially on the back side. This picture is a composite of two images and was edited for perspective distortion, but the relative sizes of the models are preserved, showing different efficiency of paper usage.

Clover Folding Lookalike
This is my design which at first glance looks very similar to Shuzo Fujimoto’s Clover Folding but has a completely different crease pattern and design.
The main difference is that it lacks the three-dimensionality in the central part. While Clover Folding becomes taller with each level of stacked tiles which form a pyramid, this model remains flat regardless of size. The spacing between individual tiles is less pronounced. Like Clover Folding, this model can be made larger and larger depending on how big a grid you use. The CP and precrease are quite a bit more complex to construct than in the original, but the advantage is more effective paper use: folded from a sheet of same size, the Lookalike is much larger than original Clover Folding.
As Dirk Eisner correctly pointed out, this design is pretty much an Inverted Square Twists Tessellation, the same as Robert Lang’s Koi Fish Scales. It differs from
Lang’s scales just in the spacing of molecules and arrangement of the flaps. I used the same basic idea with different modifications in many other designs as well, for example Square Pixel Tessellation, Just Stars,
Double Spearhead Tessellation and
Two-in-One Flower Tessellation
One way or another, I think this is an interesting exercise, even though I think the original is a more elegant model overall.
You can compare the lookalike and the original in this picture.
A few years after designing this, I learned that other had had the same idea (both before and after me), namely John McKeever whose version you can see on flickr and who mentioned also Mark Leonard and possibly others as independent discoverers.

Celtic Cross 1.1
An improved version of my Celtic Cross. Based on standing crosses  found throughout the British Isles.
This new version is much more stable and less likely to topple than the old one. It also looks nice both from the front and from the back.
Generally speaking, it is similar to two copies of v. 1.0 put back-to-back, and therefore requires a longer strip of paper (an A4 sheet cut in half lengthwise and glued by the short ends was used for this fold).
The central part of the cross can be tessellated.

Clover Folding (22×22 grid)
I hadn’t folded Shuzo Fujimoto’s Clover Folding for at least two years when I decided to fold one again after seeing some examples beautifully folded by John McKeever. This one is folded from just a 22×22 grid.
You can compare it to my Clover Folding Lookalike which looks very similar despite having a different structure.

Chevron Corrugation (UD-UU-DU-DD)
Yet another variant of my Chevron Corrugation.

Felix Culpa Tessellation
Believe it or not, this tessellation is closely related to my Double Spearhead Tessellation.
The idea came about when I was teaching the latter at BOS50 and one of the participants (whose name I unfortunately do not remember) made a mistake. I pointed it out but also remarked that it could be an interesting variation. After getting home, I worked on the molecule and ended up with this design.
The molecule uses an 8×8 grid and the whole model uses a 32×32 diagonally rotated square grid.
The name is Latin and means “happy fault”. It originates from a religious context (God can turn even a grave evil into something good) but here I used it because of how the model came to be (an error made during a workshop turned into an interesting new design).
Washi paper courtesy of Satoko Saito.

Her Majesty’s Tessellation
The same molecule as in Her Majesty’s Box, used for a tessellation. Diagonally rotated square grid, 32×32.
You can compare this fold to a less dense one folded from a larger grid.

Her Majesty’s Box (gold Washi)
A box designed on my way back home from BOS50 convention (I had the idea for the molecule earlier, though). Folded from a sheet of gold-red Washi.
You can compare it to the picture of the prototype: take notice of the number of auxiliary creases, the quality of the paper, etc.

Metal Star
Metal Star, designed by Małgorzata Łodo. From a hexagon with 16×16×16 hex grid.
Folded during a workshop at the 12th convention of Polish Origami Association. This is one of the rare cases where I found a model I folded during a workshop to be of sufficient quality to show in public.

Framed Two-in-One Flower with Color Change
A slight modification of my Framed Two-in-One Flower, with a color-changed frame.
The colour change is very simple: basically, in the first step the paper is blintzed and then folding proceeds as for the standard version (some excess paper gets hidden later on but this is quite trivial).
Folded from a single sheet of duo-color Kami paper.

Her Majesty’s Box (WIP)
A new box, aptly named Her Majesty’s Box, taking shape on the train back from the
50th Anniversary Convention of British Origami Society. Both the convention and the sightseeing tour afterwards were very inspiring and I came back home with lots of new ideas. Thanks to everyone who attended my workshops or just stopped by to chat or fold together.
While I normally don’t publish pictures of work-in-progress, I thought in this case it would be interesting to compare the prototype to the clean fold I plan to make later (later update: here it is). The molecule has been on my mind for at least two weeks and it is related to Square Interlace Tessellation. Time on the train, bus and plane allowed me to test different arrangements of the molecules (this pattern can be tessellated) and to notice that when used on a box, the pleats form an interesting pattern which could be compared to the rods of a royal crown.

Double Spearhead Tessellation with Woven Spearheads Tessellation Margin
I will be teaching my Double Spearhead Tessellation in a workshop during BOS 50th anniversary convention in Stratford-upon-Avon a week from now.
In this rendition, I surrounded the molecules of Double Spearhead Tessellation with a frame of
Woven Spearheads Tessellation molecules.
Paper courtesy of Satoko Saito.

Woven Spearheads Tessellation
This tessellation is just a slight modification of Double Spearhead Tessellation but it looks much more like Woven Rhombi Tessellation.
The similarity to Double Spearhead Tessellation is most apparent in the back-lit picture. The two are compatible in that they can be combined in a single model. Their Crease Patterns (CP) also share a lot of similarity: the creases are all in the same places and only differ in their mountain-valley orientation.
The grid in this fold is 18×18. Paper (probably Thai Unryu) courtesy of Satoko Saito.

Framed Two-in-One Flower (Purple)
A fold of Framed Two-in-One Flower, folded from purple
Tant paper.

Chevron Corrugation (UD-DU) from Blue Khepera Paper
A new fold of my UD-DU Chevron Corrugation.

Hydrangea Cube (Harmony paper)
Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea can be used as a modular unit. The method was first published by
Meenakshi Mukerji and then reinvented independently by myself. I plan to publish a tutorial on this subject soon
[update: here it is].
The different colors of the different levels of the hydrangeas are a result of using Harmony paper with a radial gradient pattern.
You can compare this model to my older fold and to the Hydrangea Icosahedron which is made in the same way but uses 30 rather than just 6 units.

Intersecting Cylinders
This is a very cool model, designed by Roman Remme.
Due to the curvilinear folds which were designed with the help of computer software, the crease pattern can not be created by hand but has to be plotted or pre-creased by machine. I had the pleasure of folding this model in Roman’s workshop at the Origami Outdoor Meeting in Kraków, Poland, this year.
Since Robin beat me to it and published pictures of his fold first, I’m adding a picture of this model backlit. It shows the structure of the twists quite well. After some getting used to, these twists were actually quite intuitive to collapse and not so much different from regular planar twists.

Viper Corrugation
This corrugation is just a single row of molecules from Nest of Vipers Corrugation.
This picture shows the opposite side of the corrugation than the former.

Nest of Vipers Corrugation
My new origami corrugation. Since it causes the sheet to curl, I’m thinking about using it for a lampshade or similar object. Different curling patterns can be obtained when using a regular square grid and a grid rotated 45 degrees.

Shamrock Box (Slightly Simplified)
Here is a slightly simplified version of my Shamrock Box. The original was based on a molecule which can easily be tessellated. However, with a single molecule used for a box, there is no need to connect multiple molecules, and the model can be simplified. Later,
I found a way to tessellate the simplified shamrock anyway with just a slight modification.
Have a look at the [comparison]((/models/shamrock-box-simplified-variants) of this model with the fully simplified variant.

Shamrock Box (Simplified)
Here is a fully simplified version of my Shamrock Box. The original was based on a molecule which can easily be tessellated. However, with a single molecule used for a box, there is no need to connect multiple molecules, and the model can be simplified. Later,
I found a way to tessellate the simplified shamrock anyway with just a slight modification.
Have a look at the comparison of this model with the slightly simplified variant.

Simplified Shamrock Box Variants
This picture shows a comparison of two variants of Simplified Shamrock Box:
Simplified Shamrock Box (on the left)
Slightly Simplified Shamrock Box (on the right).
The “slightly simplified” version uses a 16×16 grid (8×8 of which is taken by the molecule) while the “fully simplified” version used a 12×12 grid.
This makes the “fully simplified” version more paper-effective and causes it to produce a larger box when folded from a sheet of same size as the
“slightly simplified” version.
A consequence of more effective paper usage in “fully simplified” variant is that the locks are on the outside of the walls and are visible as a distinct pattern on two of them while the “slightly simplified” variant has completely smooth walls.

Union Jack Tessellation
This origami tessellation represents Union Jack, the flag of the UK.  Since the pattern is quite intricate, even a single molecule can make an interesting model.
The collapse is rather difficult, but it is possible to fold a simplified version. The molecule uses a 10×7 square grid (with a few creases with half-unit coordinates). However, in order for it to actually look like the British flag, an extra unit of margin is needed, bringing the grid to 12×9.
This margin can be shared by adjacent molecules.
This model was folded from a paper called Earth Treasure, which I reviewed in detail.

Fragile Heart Tessellation
This is a tessellation which represents a heart. The heart can be shaped to become a broken heart, which allows the model to be treated as action origami.
The fact that the hearts can easily be broken led me to naming the model Fragile Hearts.
The tessellation molecule can also be used as decoration on an origami box and this is what you can see in the image above. This design was one of the subjects in round 2 of IOIO 2017 competition, but I myself have never folded a full tessellation, just a box with a single molecule.

Blazing Propellers Tessellation
A modification of my earlier Propellers Tessellation. The blazing propeller also resembles a whirlpool or a tropical cyclone. 14×14 grid per molecule, 48×48 for the whole model, grid rotated 45° relative to paper edge.
Red Khepera paper courtesy of [Robin Scholz]/people/robin-scholz.

Broken Heart Box
A box with a heart, which is also an action origami model. When things go wrong, the heart can be reshaped into a broken heart. The heart itself can be tessellated. In this case I call it Fragile Heart Tessellation
(fragile because it can easily be broken).
The heart itself uses a 12×10 grid and the whole box a 16×16 grid.

Sharp Propellers Tessellation
A minor modification of my Propellers Tessellation: the blades are sharper and more slender than in the original.

Hydrangea Heart
My modification of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea into a heart shape. I found on flickr  a similar model, designed by Francis Ow.

Box with Ribbon Bow (diagonal)
A box with a ribbon bow, constructed using a molecule of my Sunflower Tessellation and with color change.
This is a variant where the ribbon runs along the diagonals rather than parallel to the sides (in contrast to this version.
During the recent German Origami Convention, I was asked to show how to fold this model and had issues recreating it. We ended up folding a slightly different variant and only in the next morning did I remember how to fold the original. But if more time had passed since designing (here it was just three months),
I might not have been able to recall it so easily from memory. This is just why it’s important to keep good documentation on all designs.

Flower Tessellation
Flower Tessellation, designed by Meenakshi Mukerji. The molecule is derived from the
Crossed Box Pleat (CBP). I folded and photographed this model for Meenakshi’s upcoming book,
Origami All Kinds.
This was my first more complex model folded from Wibalin paper: have a look at my review.

Wedding Day Envelope (with Twisted Heart Molecule)
An envelope for a wedding day card, featuring two hearts. The hearts are molecules of my Twisted Heart Tessellation. Basically, they are modified square twists.

Box with Pajarita 1.1
This is version 1.1 of my Box with Pajarita. In this improved version, I took advantage of the fact that the box only has one molecule, and so I could get rid of some constructs which are necessary in a tessellation but superfluous when only a single molecule is needed.
This way the leg is cleaner (just a mountain fold instead of a sink), and some places have fewer layers of paper.

Thermos
This is what one of the stages of collapsing my Big and Small Squares Tessellation looks like.
I couldn’t help but think of a thermos bottle. The extra texture looks like greeble and gives the object a high-tech appearance, perhaps as a part of some advanced device at CERN.

Body and Blood
An origami tessellation for Maundy Thursday and Easter.

Shamrock Box
Box with a single molecule of my Shamrock Tessellation.
Folded from 16×16 grid, of which the molecule consumes 12×12.
I later designed several variants, including a slightly simplified version and an even simpler one.

Corrugation: Shark Teeth
My new iso-area origami corrugation which I called Shark Teeth due to the sharp triangular molecules of which it is composed. Like many other corrugations, this one also displays strong anisotropy: it can be folded flat when squeezed in one direction but offers a lot of resistance in the perpendicular direction.
Folded from Khepera paper.

Box with Ribbon Bow
Box with a ribbon bow, constructed using a molecule of my Sunflower Tessellation and with color change added to make the ribbon stand out better from the background. A variant without color change is also possible, but less interesting.
While the general idea is simple, the collapse includes one sink which is really tough unless you find the proper way of executing it.
It is also possible to make a variant where the molecule and its outgoing pleats are parallel to the square’s diagonals rather than sides.

Stars and Squares (diagonal grid)
Folding Stars and Squares Tessellation from a diagonal grid (rotated 45°) leads to an interesting effect. At the edges, small triangles form, creating a jagged margin around the whole model. A 32×32 grid was used in this case, but 16×16 is also suitable, though not as nice.

Stacked Hearts
Stacked molecules of my Hearts Tessellation. This model is a fractal, and you can go on stacking heart upon heart indefinitely, each twice as large as the previous one.
The different color of the last level is not a result of color change but rather of using Harmony paper whose color is different near the edges than in the center.
While this rendition is finished off as a standalone model, it is possible to also tessellate molecules stacked in this way.

Happy St. Patrick’s Day!
To celebrate St. Patrick’s Day, here’s a tessellation with a beer tankard and shamrocks. Each of these molecules can also be tessellated independently of the other (see Shamrock Tessellation for details).
The shamrock uses a 12×12 grid, the beer tankard 13×16 and the whole model is made from a 43×48 grid.
Folded from Palatina paper, painted green with acryl. Folding this model gave me second thoughts about this paper’s properties and prompted me to update my review of this paper.

Stars and Squares (gift-wrapping paper)
A back-lit picture of Stars and Squares Tessellation, invented independently by me and
Shuzo Fujimoto. You can find a similar backlit picture of this model in his 1980 book, Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami.
Japanese gift-wrapping paper courtesy of Satoko Saito.

Shamrock Tessellation
I was inspired by this model by Matthew Green to also design a model for St. Patrick’s Day.
A bigger model is coming up, which I hope to finish on time, but meanwhile here’s just a preview: Shamrock Tessellation.
This design is derived from my Maltese Cross molecule.
The grid is 12×12, so large mainly because I wanted to have nice uniform pleats between molecules rather than extra layers of paper on top of the background.
This pleat layout also allows the shamrocks to be arbitrarily rotated in 90° intervals or the stalk to point either left or right, and all these variants can be connected seamlessly in a single tessellation. I later designed a simplified version.
Like most of my other molecules, this once can also be transformed into a box if you only want to fold a single one and yet get a nice model. See also the improved version, Shamrock Tessellation 1.1.
Folded from Palatina paper which I recently discovered, and painted with acryl (two shades of green, one of them metallic).

Leafless Hydrangea
This Leafless Hydrangea model is a simple modification of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Hydrangea. It’s interesting how a simple change can modify a model’s appearance. Just folding back the petals makes this tessellation look more like some mechanical device than a flower.
I folded this model in order to test a new kind of paper which I ran into at a local art supply store in Warsaw, Poland. It’s
Fabriano Palatina paper and I wrote down my first impressions in a blog post.

Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust
Origami is but pieces of colored paper, easily consumed by the elements and forgotten.

Box with Pajarita
Box with a single molecule of my Pajarita Tessellation.
Folded from Harmony paper which allowed the Pajarita to better stand out from the background.
I later improved the design in Box with Pajarita v. 1.1.

Celtic Cross Tessellation
An origami tessellation based on my Celtic Cross model. This fold has a margin and extra space between molecules for a grid of 28×28.

Big and Small Squares
While designing Scroll of time: 2017, I needed a widget which would allow me to have some square twists on one side of the paper and then to smoothly transition to having the same kind of molecules on the other side. I realized that this widget could be used as a standalone tessellation molecule, so here it is. The name Big and Small Squares says it all. A single molecule is 10×8 grid units (or 5×4 if you only count adjacent mirrored copies as separate molecules), and the whole model is folded from a 32×32 grid. Similarly to
Brick and Mortar Tessellation, this can be considered a variation on the subject of
Momotani’s Wall.
During collapse, this design takes on interesting shapes, some of which can stand on their own as separate models (see
Thermos Bottle for an example).
You can easily spot imperfections in the folding, and tape on the back side which I used to fix the model when the paper tore. This is a big model which hangs on a wall, and I folded it from Fabriano Murillo paper which I had not used before. You can read the whole review in a separate blog post.

Hearts Tessellation
A quick @tessellation of hearts. Molecule design is somewhat similar to Heart Tessellation by 
Haligami (Halina Rościszewska-Narloch).
See also Stacked Hearts for a fractalized version of the molecule.
Model folded from fine Japanese paper I got from Mrs. Satoko Saito (齋藤聰子).

Rhombic Pixel Tessellation
This model is a modification of my Square Pixel Tessellation. I just scaled the CP in one direction and so pixels became rhombi.
This was also an experiment in folding from an unusual paper, described in a separate blog post.

Pajarita Tessellation
The Pajarita is a classical origami model which seems to be especially beloved in the Spanish-speaking parts of the world. In this tessellation, I place little Pajaritas all over the plane.
The molecule uses a 6×6 grid and is derived from my Propellers Tessellation. Note that the molecules are not placed one directly above the other, but each row introduces a shift of one grid unit to the side. This is necessary in order for the pleats going up from the molecule to connect with the pleats going down from the next. Connecting these pleats also makes the use of a rather interesting kind of sink necessary. In order to collapse this molecule easier, large grid spacing and thin paper are recommended. In this particular rendition,
I used Kraft paper.

Mini-Sunflower
This is a minimalistic version of my Sunflower Tessellation, folded from a 16×16 grid.
It consists of just a single molecule surrounded by petals, and thus contains all the elements of the full-scale model but in smaller number.
This makes it a great practice model before folding the big one.

Sunflower Tessellation
My new tessellation design, folded from a single sheet of Tant paper.
I wanted the edges to be something more interesting than just straight paper pleats, so I designed petals which I think are a more unique part of this model than the tessellation molecules themselves. While originally inspired by the edges of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Clover Folding, these petals are much more complex, and correspondingly require more paper (a 5 grid unit wide margin along each edge). As you can see, in contrast to the petals in Clover Folding, they are quite well separated from each other. They are also as thick as the molecules, so they form a part of the tessellation in their own right rather than just a backdrop upon which molecules rest. There is a somewhat contrived locking mechanism which causes these petals to hold together any loose paper pleats one would normally get at the edges of molecules. It took me four different designs before I had a solution which satisfied me: everything was tightly connected and no flap was loose (at the cost of the collapse being rather complex).
The same petal design can also work with Four-Sink Base molecules and others which have the same arrangement of pleats at the edges. It should be possible to adapt this idea to some other edge pleat configurations as well.
The tessellation molecule is folded from a 6×6 grid and there are 5×5 molecules in this model. The complete grid was 40×40 (2⋅5 for the margins + 5⋅6 for the central molecules). This can be scaled up or down depending on how complex a sunflower you want to make. A
Mini-Sunflower with just a single molecule can be made from the convenient 16×16 grid.
I don’t normally measure the time things take me to fold, but in this case I recorded some statistics (not counting design, test folds and failed clean folds
I tried before I succeeded, and the time needed for wet squashing phase which does not require the folder’s presence): 5.5 h for the precrease,
1.25 h collapsing the central part (regular molecules), 1.25 h collapsing the petals, 0.75 h modelling — almost 9 h total.
Later, I made a better fold of this model.

Framed Two-in-One Flower (Variant 0)
A single framed molecule of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation. This is the most basic variant both of the flower and of the frame.
This is a cleaner fold than the other variants which I posted earlier. It’s still from a 16×16 grid, but I skipped grid lines which are not absolutely necessary, so for example the frame is completely smooth. Folded from Tant paper which nicely shows its structure in the macro shot.

Bed of Nails 3D Tessellation
Bed of Nails 3D, an origami tessellation folded from a single sheet of Elephant Hide paper; no cutting or glue.
It is possible to adjust the length of the spikes and/or to make them more pointed.
This design is a sequel to my Bed of Nails tessellation but now the nails come in 3D rather than flat.
The molecule is still based around a 6×6 grid (36×29 for the whole model), but a bit more difficult to collapse than in the flat version.
I had to resort to wet folding to make EH paper hold its shape firmly in the flat areas of the board.

Scroll of Time: 2017
I wanted to try something new this year, so I folded this model from thin parchment paper whereas most of the time
I use much thicker papers. Modern parchment paper has little in common with actual parchment which was made from animal hides, but its name fits the theme of this model quite well.
Using thin paper allowed me to fold without a bone folder and to make the 128×24 grid in relatively small size. This model uses my
Square Pixel Tessellation together with an additional gadget which I use to smoothly transition molecules from one side of the paper to the other.
A bit late but: Happy New Year 2017!
And if you want to go back in time, have a look at my New Year’s model from 2016.

Hydrangea (manuscript pattern)
Happy New Year!
I’m working on a 2017-themed model but it’s not ready yet [update: here it is]. Meanwhile, some gift wrapping paper is just too nice to throw away, so I’ve been recycling scraps of packaging from presents received and given into Fujimoto’s Hydrangeas.

Celtic Cross
This free-standing cross was inspired by high crosses — stone monuments erected throughout the Middle Ages in Ireland and Britain.
The central part of the cross where the two beams meet can be used as a tessellation molecule (8×8 grid).
An updated version of this model is Celtic Cross 1.1.

Just Stars
This is what you get when you take Stars and Squares Tessellation and take away the squares.
What is left is Just Stars!
Folded from Elephant Hide paper painted with acrylics. The colors were inspired by Van Gogh’s Starry Night.
Speaking of which, you absolutely should see the whole painting rendered in origami, an amazing model by paper in dream.

Chevron Corrugation (UUDD-DDUU)
Another variant of my Chevron Corrugation.
Folded from thick laid paper with an interesting texture: have a look at my impressions from folding it.

Golden Jubilee Corrugation
After I designed this corrugation, I learned that Ron Resch had already designed it in the 1960-s, over 50 years ago.
That’s a Golden Jubilee for this model. You can see it in his Paper and Stick movie movie around 6:53.
I came to know about this movie and that it features this model from Ilan Garibi who also came up with this design independently. He has folded an interesting rendition in metal.

Square Interlace Box
This box is decorated with a pattern of Square Interlace Tessellation.
I designed it as a container for a matching bracelet which is visible in some pictures.
The lid and the bottom part of the box (hardly visible at all in the pictures) were folded from a separate square of paper each.
Both the box and the bracelet are currently (as of 2021) on display at Museo del Origami, Colonia
(formerly: Origami House Colonia), an origami museum in Uruguay.

One-Part Box with Two-in-one Flower Tessellation
Most boxes I design are two-part boxes: the lid and the bottom part are made from two separate sheets. This one is a flat, single-piece box
(almost a tato): in order to open it, you need to partially unfold it. The decoration on top is a molecule of my
Two-in-One Flower Tessellation.

Heptagonal Star Box (Chevron Corrugation)
This seven-sided star shape can be used as one half of a two-piece box or alone as an ornament. This heptagonal star design is based around my
Chevron Corrugation (UD-DU variant) and folded from a rectangle with 16×5 square grid.
Variants with more rays or donut-shaped stars with a hole in the middle can be made in a similar fashion.

Brick and Mortar
I designed this tessellation as a variant of Momotani’s Wall with some extra spacing between the bricks added (hence the name Brick and Mortar Tessellation).
The basic molecule is 5×5 grid units — compared to the classic, the difference is using a square twist with 2:1 slope instead of the 1:1 Kawasaki twist.
Just like the original, this is an iso-area tessellation.
It’s a simple modification so someone may well have folded it before.

Chevron Corrugation (UD-DU)
This is a new variant of my Chevron Corrugation.
The variant shown here was designed by myself, and, as I later learned, also by others, though with different angles - see https://flic.kr/p/bQtKwk and https://flic.kr/p/bz6TuN for discussion.
The basic variant was also invented independently by myself and several other people.
Since this variant is iso-area, just like Iso-Area Chevron Corrugation, and there are some more variants which share this property but are still different, I had to come up with a naming scheme. It is described in detail in the naming variants section of main model description.

The Cliff
Origami corrugation, based on an asymmetric zig-zag pattern (actually I folded this model using exactly the same sheet of paper).
Folded from a thick paper whose pattern looks as if there were small hairs embedded in the pulp. It is supposed to be produced by Favini, but I was not able to find the exact name. If you recognize this paper, please let me know.

Hexagonal Diamond Corrugation
I derived this corrugation from Iso-Area Diamond Corrugation by adding some extra space between the diagonal creases. This changes the appearance of the corrugation a lot. It’s a simple change, so I wouldn’t be surprised if others had also folded it at some point.
In nature, there exists a mineral which is a hexagonal diamond allotrope, called lonsdaleite. It’s a rare mineral which occurs in meteorites. However, this corrugation does not represent its crystal lattice exactly since the lattice is three-dimensional and this model is flat, so it is closer to graphite or graphene.

Square Interlace Tessellation (from Elephant Hide paper)
A refold of my Square Interlace Tessellation with graphite Elephant Hide paper.
I think it’s much better than my original fold — funny how over time one learns to fold even one’s own models better.

Box with Super-Ninja Star Tessellation — Comparison of Variants
These boxes are decorated with a molecule of Super-Ninja Star Tessellation which is an extension of
Ninja Star Tessellation. The super-variant has larger blades.
The variants use the same molecule, but differ in the thickness of the lid: the brown model is the Thick Lid Variant and the purple the Thin Lid variant.

Box with Super-Ninja Star Tessellation (Thin Lid Variant)
A box decorated with a molecule of Super-Ninja Star Tessellation which is an extension of
Ninja Star Tessellation. The super-variant has larger blades.
There is also another variant which produces a thicker lid.
Also, check out this comparison of variants side-by-side.

Box with Super-Ninja Star Tessellation (Thick Lid Variant)
A box decorated with a molecule of Super-Ninja Star Tessellation which is an extension of
Ninja Star Tessellation. The super-variant has larger blades.
There is also another variant which produces a thinner lid.
Also, check out this comparison of variants side-by-side.

Walled Garden Tessellation
Walled Garden Tessellation, designed and folded by me. Molecule based around a 12×12 grid.

Box with Twisted Bird Base Tessellation Molecule
Box with a single molecule of my Twisted Bird Base Tessellation.
To make a box, fold the molecule using just a square with half the side of the paper, located in the center of the sheet.
The margin left is then used to form the walls.
Paper by Julia Schönhuber.

Hedgehogs!
A tessellation which fills the plane with cute little hedgehogs. Hedgehog design is a modified version of Pureland Hedgehog by
Sebastien Limet. Folded from copper-colored Washi.

Iso-Area Diamond Corrugation
The original Diamond Corrugation was invented independently by Ilan Garibi and Andrea Russo
(who used the name Triangùli in speculo).
I thought I’d make an iso-area version since I haven’t seen anyone publish such a modification yet despite its obviousness. I guess someone must have come up with this idea before, but I just couldn’t find any pictures. According to Ekaterina Lukasheva, there was a curvilinear version designed by David Huffman.
Just like many other iso-area designs, this one also has the nice property of not rolling up: since both sides are same (iso-area), there is no tension difference between the two.

Framed Two-in-One Flower (Variant 3)
Yet another variant of framed molecule of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation.
Molecule and frame folded from a single sheet of Satogami paper (16×16 grid).
Compared to Variant #1, the molecule is slightly modified and the frame is in partially unfolded state so instead of a thin and sharply defined frame there is a thick and smooth border.
The same trick can of course also be applied to many other tessellations.

Framed Two-in-One Flower (Variant 2)
Another variant (Variant 2) of framed molecule of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation.
Molecule and frame folded from a single sheet of Satogami paper (16×16 grid).
Compared to Variant #1, both the molecule and the frame differ. Here, the frame is offset from the flower by an extra grid unit.
The same trick can of course also be applied to many other tessellations. I will post some more variants of the frame and of the tessellation molecule shortly.

Framed Two-in-One Flower (Variant 1)
A single molecule of Variant 1 of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation together with a frame, folded from a single sheet of Satogami paper (16×16 grid).
The same trick can of course also be applied to many other tessellations. I will post some more variants of the frame and of the tessellation molecule shortly.

Woven Rhombi
This piece uses an 18×18 grid but since each molecule is 4×4, a 16×16 grid works as well, though you get a straight edge instead of the overhanging rhombi.
I later learned that Ilan Garibi (who used the name Flambuginous) and Robert Lang had come up with the same design independently.
Folded from handmade paper made by John Gerard Paperworks.

Thorny Stalk Tessellation
This pattern, derived from my Double Spearhead Tessellation curls up, forming a tube which looks like the stalk of a rose or another thorny plant. When you look inside, you can recognize the Yoshimura Pattern — rows of triangles which form a cylindrical surface.

Brexit
Model designed on my plane back from UK which I visited just days after the Brexit vote. The British Flag itself can be used as a tessellation molecule and tiled. I plan to fold a tiled version of this Union Jack Tessellation when time allows
[update: I did].
Update: even though the Brexit vote was a direct inspiration to think about the UK and, in effect, come up with this design, I admit I also used the name
Brexit in part because it was a hot topic, warranting increased traffic. Using this controversial subject obviously caused some comments in social media from both the for and against camps, with people interpreting the work as being pro or contra. While my particular opinion of Brexit was negative, and the shaping of the model was supposed to represent the flag coming apart, this model was not really supposed to be a statement in the discussion, especially since it was folded after decisions had already been made and not much could change anyway. Still, the fact that it was not clear from the model itself if the flag was being torn apart by the wind or proudly flying in it, leads to a lesson learned — origami is apparently like jokes: if you have to explain it, maybe it’s not as good as you may think.

Box with Walled Garden Tessellation Molecule
Another tessellation disguised as a box so that I can get away with folding just a single molecule, but I do plan to fold a full-fledged tessellation some time, too [update: I did]. My design; the molecule is folded from a 12×12 grid.
I used Kami with a pattern which matches the symmetry of the box well.

Two-in-One Flower Tessellation
There is only one kind of molecule in this origami tessellation, but depending on how you look, you can see two different kinds of flowers here, hence the name “two in one”. Each molecule requires an 8×8 grid.
The pattern is derived from four molecules of my Double Spearhead Tessellation slightly modified and combined into a single molecule.

Laputa
This origami model is a variant of my Stacked propellers Tessellation. It is named after
Laputa, the flying island described in Gulliver’s Travels. I thought this painted paper was a good match for a city in the clouds, and the molecules resemble abstract buildings. Note that the central one is slightly different from others. Each molecule requires a 16×16 grid.

Box with Two-in-One Flower Tessellation
Box with a single molecule of my Two-in-One Flower Tessellation. This pattern is derived from four molecules of Double Spearhead Tessellation slightly modified and combined into a single molecule. You will see where the name 2-in-1 comes from when I publish pictures of the tessellation folded with multiple molecules.
Many variants of this tessellation are possible: another one is the Nuclear Flower.

Cluster Tessellation
Cluster Tessellation, designed and folded by Michał Kosmulski. There are several different ways of achieving a similar effect but with a slightly different pattern in the background (one can for example start from a four-sink-base). The variant shown here is the one with cleanest background, so that the clusters and not the background are exposed. It starts from what I call Clover Base, that is a level-1 Clover Folding by Fujimoto (just the central square, folded from 6×6 grid) [later update: this is usually referred to as Crossed Box Pleat].
Folded from rare orange-colored Elephant Hide paper.
At a later time, Angelika Schwengers independently developed her Traubenbox (Grape-Box) which uses a very similar molecule for decoration.

Parrot Tulip Opening
A small tessellated version of Meenakshi Mukerji’s Tulip, originally designed as a modular origami unit.
Tant paper with acrylic paint.
Folded from unpublished diagrams kindly provided by Meenakshi Mukerji for testing of the tessellated variant.

Picture Frame with Hedgehogs
Origami picture frame with two little hedgehogs on the bottom bar. The frame is based on this design.
The hedgehogs are a prototype of what later became Hedgehogs! Tessellation.
The picture placed in the frame is of a hedgehog that used to live in my parents’ yard.

Box with Shooting Star
I designed this box during the annual meeting of Polish Meteoritical Society (meteorites are one of my hobbies alongside origami).
The shooting star is based on my Epiphany II model and can be tessellated.
I used wet folding for shaping of the molecule.
The nice thing about boxes is they allow you to make a nice model while folding only a single molecule of a tessellation which saves time when you want to publish a new design but lack the time to make a larger composition.

Tessellated Anuradha
Meenakshi Mukerji’s Anuradha was originally designed as a modular origami unit but after minor modification it can also be used as a tessellation molecule. Folded from unpublished diagrams kindly provided by Meenakshi Mukerji for testing of the tessellated variant.

Maltese Cross Framed
A single molecule of my Maltese Cross Tessellation, which is closely related to the Cross Pattee Tessellation presented in the
Coat of Arms of Rzeszów model. The frame is modular, inspired by Hans-Werner Guth and Thoki Yenn, and described in more detail on its model page.

Coat of Arms of Rzeszów
Coat of arms of the city of Rzeszów, executed in origami from a single square sheet of paper. The cross visible in the center of the shield, known as Cross pattée, is often used in heraldry.
The cross can be used as a tessellation molecule, so a whole plane can be filled with repeating copies. It uses an 8×8 grid, and the whole shield is made from a 16×16 grid.

Nuclear Flower Box
This origami box is decorated with a single molecule of Nuclear Flower Tessellation, a variant of
Two-in-One Flower Tessellation. The name stems from the fact that viewed from above, the flower resembles a symbol often used in atomic / nuclear physics — orbitals around a nucleus.
The molecule can be tessellated to fill the whole plane but since it uses an 8×8 grid, when placed centrally inside a 16×16 grid, it can be conveniently shaped as an ornament on the lid of a box. I used this model to test red Elephant Hide paper which I was happy to be able to buy as it is becoming increasingly rare. The paper came in pre-cut 20 cm sheets, and it seems this variant has a declared weight higher than the EH standard of 110 gsm.

Sprout Tessellation (refold)
I refolded my Sprout Tessellation for the German Origami Convention in Erkner. Asymmetry and folding the grid at an angle relative to paper edges are inspired by an earlier workshop with Melina Hermsen (Yureiko).

Growth
This origami tessellation is made from Square Pixel Tessellation molecule variants which allow the molecules to be made in different sizes.
Later, I improved this model (literally, the same piece of paper) in Growth 1.1.

Molecules Great and Small
This origami tessellation is an experiment in mixing molecules of different sizes in a single model. The molecules come from my
Spread-Sunk Square Twist Tessellation (SSST). Designed and folded by me.

Hugging Triangles Corrugation folded from fabric
My Hugging Triangles Corrugation, executed in fabric-covered paper with aluminum foil backing
(three-layer composite material).
The corrugation is so named after the joints between octagons and squares where two triangular interlocking rings meet.

Double Spearhead Tessellation
This is an origami design derived from my Square Pixel Tessellation.
It was featured in Robert Lang’s @tessellation book.
An interesting design derived from this one is Woven Spearheads Tessellation.
Based on folding this model, I wrote a review of Eko Lux paper it was folded from.

Tympanum Corrugation (iso-area)
Iso-area variant of my Tympanum Corrugation. Since both sides are the same, there is no net tension, and the model stays flat without trying to curl up.

Square Pixel Tessellation
This is my recent design for folding arbitrary bitmap images as origami tessellations. Unlike using four-sink-base
(see Saturn Tessellation), each molecule represents just a single pixel rather than a block of pixels, so all pixels look exactly the same.
The molecule is made from a 4×4 grid, but the size reduction in folded molecule is just 1:2, compared to 1:3 with four-sink base which needs only a 3×3 grid.
So, there is bit more precreasing but the resulting tess is larger, and also the collapse is much easier.
The molecule for visible pixels is similar to a square twist, but only the central square is visible. The CP is very simple so someone may have come up with it before, for example it seems Robson Renê Albuquerque got a very similar pattern at the back of his chessboard tessellation
[later update: confirmed, this pattern has been known long before, but not as a way of making pixel art].
The empty pixel molecule is just a square twist pulled back to the reverse side of the paper, so in the front just a clean pleat is visible.
Anyway, even if the front molecule was already known, I haven’t seen a combination like this used for pixmap images, so I hope this brings something new to the bitmap origami genre.
This is just a quick demo of the technique — I plan to make something bigger and more photography-like using this method when time allows.

Tympanum Corrugation
A new origami design of mine, called Tympanum Corrugation because it resembles the tympanum of a Greek temple.
The idea came to me after I designed this dog house — the corrugation is just the roof, repeated side by side as a tessellation.
This model has a slight tendency to curl, but an iso-area variant is also possible which lacks the tension of the basic variant and can lay completely flat.

Sprout Tessellation
Sprout Tessellation, designed and folded by Michał Kosmulski. Derived from my Squares and Crosses Tess.
Later, I made a better fold for the German Origami Convention in Erkner.

Squares and Crosses Tessellation
My recent design, derived from Ninja Star Tessellation. 6×6 square grid per molecule.
This design can be further modified (pictures coming up soon).
Folded from Canford paper which is pretty thick (150 gsm) but with a slightly larger grid than usual and a bit of wet folding finish, it worked pretty well.

Stacked Propellers Tessellation (single molecule)
This is a fractalized version of my Propellers Tessellation. Stacked Propellers Tessellation is folded from a 16×16 grid per molecule in this case but you can go on and on stacking one propeller on top of another if you use a larger grid.
Elephant Hide paper painted teal with metallic acrylic paint.
This first fold of the design only comprised one molecule, but later I folded a full model with multiple molecules.
I found a similar pattern designed by Ilan Garibi, called Bagan (I’ve also seen the name
Pagodas used by others for Ilan’s model).

Ice Cube Tray
This ice cube tray was folded from a single sheet of Elephant Hide paper sandwiched with aluminium foil in order to make it water-tight. The tray itself is an example of Grating Tessellation aka “box divider” (designed by myself and independently also by others before).

Grating Tessellation
This is Grating Tessellation, a new origami design of mine. Vertical walls of the grating divide the whole plane into small cells which give this tessellation some practical uses such as storing small items (nails, screws, etc.) or making ice cubes.
Each molecule uses 3×3 grid units. Collapsing seems hard at first but not more so once you learn the right trick.
Please comment and let me know if you have seen this design before. I think the end result is pretty elegant, but the crease pattern is so simple I think others may have come up with it before.
Update: Nick Robinson pointed me to a very similar model and he says he has seen similar designs in other places, too. This sort of model is known as “box divider technique”. Compared to the video, my model uses a more symmetrical layout of the flaps inside the wall intersection: four small flaps, each one going inside one of the walls, whereas the model shown in the video has just one big flap hidden inside a single wall, but apart from that, they are the same. I also found a beautiful model of a box of chocolates which seems to use the same or very similar technique.
It seems this model has also been independently devised by Tom Hull who used the name Grid Dome.
Thanks to Matthias Schwar who pointed this out in a flickr comment.

SSST-Propellers Hybrid Tessellation
This tessellation is a hybrid of my SSST (Spread-Sunk Square Twist) and
Propellers tessellations.
Folded from Ingres paper (90 gsm). It is soft and has little rigidity which makes the collapse harder than with papers
I normally use, but on the other hand I like the texture, the fringed edges, and the relatively big color palette in which this paper is available.

Rosebud Maze Tessellation
A new tessellation, designed and folded by me. Basic molecule is 6×6 grid units. In this particular execution, a lot of extra margin was added around and between molecules in order to use the convenient to fold 32×32 grid.

Elevated Twists
These pyramid-shaped structures appear as intermediate stages when collapsing some more complex tessellations. Basically, they are square twists in the upright position, with just a little flattening at the base.

Nomad Camp Tessellation
I derived the Nomad Camp Tessellation from my Dancing Squares Tessellation.
To make things more interesting, instead of just filling the whole plane with identical molecules, for this model I added some “streets” between the tents as well as a small dune.

Puffed Big Propellers (two variants)
The basic idea of Propellers Tessellation can be extended into countless variants, especially when one goes from the original 8×8 grid to larger grid sizes.
In this example, two different variants, differing slightly in the shape of the blades, but both made from 16×16 grid, are shown. Both are based around a puffed,
3D shape in the center which gives the propellers three-dimensional bodies, somewhat similar in appearance to screw propellers used on ships.
Two pictures of the same model, taken almost three years apart, are shown here. I think the comparison shows that my photography skills and gear have improved over time. It’s interesting to re-visit one’s own work in order to check how the style and technique change over time, but since publishing pictures online is my main way of displaying models, photography matters as well.

Floppy Disk (Square Interlace Bitmap Tessellation)
Floppy disks are pretty much obsolete by now but there was a time when they were state-of-the-art in personal computer storage, and they live on in the Save icon found in most of today’s applications.
I folded this 3.5” floppy as a test of my newest idea in bitmap tessellations — the Square Interlace Bitmap Tessellation. The rough pixels are made from my
Square Interlace Tessellation, with each molecule of the tess (6×6 grid units) representing a 2×2 pixel block. A smooth pixel is made by modifying one quadrant of a molecule.
Folding on this model is not very clean since I was testing how small a grid is still workable. Here, a 32×32 grid was folded from a 21 cm square of Elephant
Hide. It’s foldable, but it gets messy, and the smooth pixels, which have many layers of paper, are so thick they wouldn’t lay reasonably flat if it were not for wet folding.

Dancing Squares Tessellation
A simple modification of the square twist, so it may well have been invented by others before. Since it’s hard to fold the creases exactly, each square is a little bit off the ideal angle, giving the group a shaky, or dancing, appearance. You can also view the squares as little figures with legs and hands… but where are their heads then?

Spread-Sunk Square Twist Tessellation (SSST)
This tessellation is a very simple variation of the standard square twist which results, nonetheless, in an interesting pattern. Each of the four corners of the central square of the twist is spread-sunk, hence the name. Designed by myself, but since the idea is simple, it may well have been invented by someone else before. Folded from a sheet of thin mulberry paper with a golden leaf motif.

Ninja Star Tessellation
I came up with this design while playing with variants of my Propellers Tessellation but then realized that many others had already come up with this pattern before, so I used the same name, ninja star. Each molecule uses an 8×8 grid.
Due to the thickness of Murano paper I used for this model, I had to resolve to wet-folding which was a bit messy and caused some of the colorant to be washed out.

Brain in a Vat
A brain in a vat is a thought experiment related to consciousness and the perception of reality which has, in one form or another, interested people ranging from philosophers, to philosophically-inclined science-fiction writers, to B-movie horror authors. This piece of origami treats the subject literally.
Designed and folded by me. I learned folding the pattern which became the basis for the brain itself from Joanna Sobczyk who uses it in some of her fractal flower designs (here’s an example). While this particular work is just a single brain in a box, the brain itself can with a slight modification be tessellated and I hope to fold a piece with multiple molecules some time.
This model is folded from a hexagon of Tant (8×8×8 grid). It should be relatively easy to make a variant incorporating color change but one would probably have to use a larger, less convenient to fold grid.

Octabird Tessellation
It may not look like it, but this tessellation is a variant of my Twisted Bird Base Tessellation.
This and the octagonal pattern result in the name octabird. The central part of each octagon can be arranged in a number of ways, two most obvious of which are visible in this image.
The collapse is rather challenging since it requires a standard twisted-bird-base collapse first (which in itself is not very easy) and then a series of closed sinks which are inconvenient to perform with stiff paper. Wet folding helps a lot.

Propellers Tessellation (short blade variant)
This is the short-blade variant of my Propellers Tessellation. Molecule is 6×6 grid units but in this rendering an extra margin of one unit is added.
Image scanned rather than photographed.

Propellers Tessellation
This tessellation is closely related to my Square Interlace Tessellation.
Grid is 8×8 per molecule. Here you can see the variant with long propeller blades but there is also a short-blade variant.
Designed and folded by me from a single sheet of black Khepera paper.
This image was scanned rather than photographed. For this particular tessellation, I found the scan much better than the photograph: lighting is very uniform and the scanner was able to reproduce the textured black color of the model much better than my photo camera could.
In October 2022, I received from Roberto Morassi pictures of some models folded by Shuzo Fujimoto, and among them was one using molecules exactly like this design (mixed with molecules of Stars and Squares), which means this design is yet another example of my model that Fujimoto had designed much earlier. I later matched it to CFW 54.

Happy New Year 2016!
Welcome to 2016! This seven-segment display, executed in origami, shows the current year, and is folded from a single sheet of Elephant Hide paper. With a little work, each segment’s on-off state can be toggled, so you can update the number next year without having to refold the whole thing. It’s probably too slow a process to qualify as action origami, though.
Individual segment design is based on Fujimoto’s Hydrangea (level 0) while the idea of using them to simulate a digital 7-segment display is mine. Others have probably also come up with it as it comes as an obvious thing when one starts folding tiled
Hydrangeas [update: indeed, I found a model of 7-segment display based on Hydrangea by saku saku].
A 64×32 grid was used. Only 26 grid units vertically are needed for the digits — the remaining 6 make up the foot which allows the tessellation to stand vertically for better viewing.

Chevron Corrugation (iso-area)
This is a variant of my Chevron Corrugation in which every other row of chevrons is reversed, i.e. pointing down instead of up. This makes the corrugation iso-area, meaning both sides look the same. It also removes the tension which causes the basic version to curl: this variant can be spread as narrow or as wide you like without curling.
Potentially, pushing individual chevrons up or down (rather than whole rows) could be used to create pixel images.
A model almost identical to this one (just the angles seem a bit different) is seen in the Paper and Stick movie by Ron Resch which shows models he designed in 1960-66.

Chevron Corrugation
Corrugation, designed and folded by me, but later I learned that Daniel Kwan folded this pattern before, inspired by a similar model by Charles Hoberman
(details here). Daniel Kwan pointed me to very interesting patent of Hoberman’s which includes pictures of the corrugation, adapted for folding from thick materials.
Even later, I found a model almost identical to the iso-area version (just the angles seem a bit different) in the Paper and Stick movie by Ron Resch which shows models designed in 1960-66.
This exact pattern (except for being based on 30° rather than 22.5° angles) was also developed by Shuzo Fujimoto.
It is CFW 380 — see instructions for exact coordinates for finding it in his books.
All the different variants of this corrugation consist of rows of chevrons, some of which may be pointing up while others are pointing down.
I mark these cases as U and D, respectively, and a dash means moving to the next row. The sequence which describes the plain, non-iso-area variant shown here is simply U. The original iso-area variant can be described as UU-DD, and there are more possibilities such as UD-DU in whose case the 2×2 “supermolecule” marked by the combination of
Us and Ds describes the whole pattern, which can be tessellated indefinitely.

Fir Cone / Christmas Ornament
These fir cones make nice Christmas tree decorations. Designed by myself, they are based on the pleated part of 
Super Pineapple Tessellation.
The smaller variant uses a 16×14 square grid. Since 16×16 is much more convenient to fold and uses a full square, two grid rows at extreme ends can either be hidden underneath or used to introduce a color-change as in the red-black one visible in the image. The elongated version, whose proportions resemble an actual fir tree cone better, is from 16×32 grid. Other grid sizes are possible as well, though the circumference should not be too large if the cone is not to have a hollow “core” in the middle.
A piece of string tied around a crumpled piece of paper squeezed into the central “tunnel” in the cone can be used as a hanger without the need to pierce the paper for attachment.

Double-Blintzed Bird Base Corrugation
After tessellating the blintzed bird base, a natural next step for me was to double-blintz it.
Bird base blintzed two times can be tessellated, and it results in a more interesting pattern than the singly-blintzed variant. The pattern is significantly different on both sides.
This corrugation was folded from Japanese Tsumugi paper. I summarized my impressions in a mini-review.

Blintzed Bird Base Corrugation
This corrugation is exactly what it says on the tin: blintzed bird bases tiled side by side. Large tilings have a slight tendency towards curling, but it can be overcome by folding all creases sharp and applying a little force in the direction opposite of the curl. Folded the right size, this corrugation could be used as an egg carton or as a set of small containers for screws, nails, candy or other small objects.
Model designed and folded by me. Later, I found out that other people had come up with the same design independently, namely Evan Zodl
(who made an interesting curved version called S³) and Toshikazu Kawasaki (his model is called Rhododendron).

Twisted Bird Base Tessellation (simple molecules)
This origami model consists of the simplest molecules of my Twisted Bird Base Tessellation. Each molecule is basically a bird base with the central part raised and twisted for a nicer shape. Apart from the simple molecule used here, many other variants are possible, some of which are shown in this model.
Collapse is a bit challenging because multiple points on the creased sheet of paper must meet at a single point in the collapsed pattern.
A generalization of this molecule is the Twisted Bird Base Fractal.

Lily Pond Picture Frame
This is a picture frame for 16:9 format, decorated with a variant of my Lily Pond Tessellation. The lilies were modelled on top of four-sink bases instead of the sunk square twists used in the original tess since this allowed for a more symmetric frame.
The picture is attached by tucking its corners into the corners of four-sinks so that only a very small part is covered. This makes four-sink-base based molecules good building blocks for picture frames.

Sunshine Tessellation
The molecule is 6×6 grid units, so normally 3×3 molecules would require an 18×18 grid. Since folding power-of-two grids is much more convenient than others,
I skipped one grid unit at the edge from all but the central molecule which allowed me to use a 16×16 grid and resulted in a pinwheel-like shape for the finished tess instead of the conventional square one would normally end up with.

Square Interlace Tessellation
This is a more conventional way of folding my square interlace tessellation than the bracelet.
I believe this model to be my first truly original tessellation which I was really happy about. My previous tessellations were either modifications of existing designs or lacked the polish I wanted my models to have.
Folded from a 32×32 grid, with each molecule using 6×6 grid units (plus one grid unit of margin around the model).
Also, do have a look at my later folds of this model (e.g. Elephant Hide version) as it took me some time to learn how to fold this model well. Yes, even when you design a model yourself, it takes time and work to learn how to fold it.
One of the keys to properly flattening the tessellation is properly applied wet-folding.

Tessellated Bracelet (Square Interlace Tessellation)
Bracelet featuring a new design of mine, the Square Interlace Tessellation.
Made from a 61×9 grid. Each molecule is 6×6 grid units and resembles two loops interlaced together to form a knot (or a pinwheel if you like).
Wet-folded to get into final shape.
In some of the images, the bracelet is accompanied by a matching box. The bracelet, the box lid, and the bottom part of the box are each made from a single sheet of graphite Elephant Hide paper.
All items and the tessellation designed and folded by me.
These models are currently (as of 2021) on display at Museo del Origami, Colonia (formerly: Origami House Colonia), an origami museum in Uruguay.

Twisted Bird Base Tessellation (with molecule examples)
I recently came up with the idea of the Twisted Bird Base Tessellation. As the name implies, it is based around the bird base which is folded with some extra paper and then twisted so that the flat part forms a square which enables tessellating. The central part pops out of the sheet and can be formed in many different ways. I plan to post a large version of the basic variant soon but in the meanwhile, here are some examples of how the molecules can be shaped.
These are obviously not all possibilities of shaping the molecules. Horizontally, the shaping of the four petals changes while the two vertical rows show two twisting directions of the central part.
Interestingly, each molecule in this example has three separate twists in three stacked layers, each with different properties:
While first picture shows some variants of shaping, further pictures show the basic molecule, in which the central part of the bird base points up from the tessellation’s plane. This is the same model as in first image but before shaping. Actually, I think the basic molecule may be the most attractive.
I also folded a larger model of the tessellation with just simple molecules.
Unlike many others, this tessellation is not based around a square or hexagonal grid.

Sunk Square Twist Tessellation
This pattern I recently came up with seems to have a lot of potential for square grid tessellations. I have a number of interesting patterns based on it which I hope to clean-fold and post on flickr soon.
This tessellation shares some properties of square twist and of four-sink-base tess. It has a twist and is chiral like the former but there is a square with four semi-free corners like in the latter. The molecule is 6×6 grid units (here 8×8 due to extra margin).
So far I’ve tried out two ways of collapsing. First is to actually fold a square twist tessellation and then to sink each of the edges that connect a pair of molecules. This is easier to grasp but harder to execute than the other method and it’s hard to not crumple the paper during the sink in tight quarters.
The other method is to collapse the final pattern all in one step. It’s harder to understand at first, but it seems to be technically less challenging.
This design is the starting point of my Lily Pond Tessellation (they differ only by shaping).

Lily Pond Tessellation
This tessellation is based on the sunk square twist pattern (visible in one of the images: it is the stage before shaping any of the molecules into flower shapes). It features four different water lily molecules. Certainly many more variants are possible.
Designed and folded by me. Grid was 40×40 which is a bit small for 25 cm paper so the details are folded less than perfectly. Each molecule is 6×6 grid units, with one unit of margin on each side.
I folded the prototype for this model while on a flight and gave it to my seat neighbor. This way the prototype ended up in Norway.

Cube from Recursive Four-Sink Base
This cube is made from six units, each of which is a recursive four-sink base modified for use as a module.
Each base is folded from 8×8 grid (where 6×6 would suffice for the plain base) and one part is folded back, creating rectangular flaps. At this stage units could be connected like the units in the Jackson Cube, however I additionally squash-fold the sides to create additional triangular flaps which make the assembly much more stable.
Four-sink base and variants are widely known and often tessellated, the modification for use as a modular is my design. The recursive version looks very similar to the model known as Andrea’s Rose (J.C. Nolan) — I haven’t checked if it is exactly the same or if there are any differences.

Saturn Tessellation
This tessellation is based on a 128×92 grid. Image is created from a four-sink-base tessellation by folding up some of the squares’ corners. While I’ve seen a number of designs using this molecule, I haven’t so far seen it used as a way of rendering bitmaps in paper. Since each sink-base molecule makes up four pixels, the “on” pixels are not all identical, which adds some interesting variation to the image.
Certainly one could use a more complex fold to distinguish the on and off pixels, but I went for simplicity.
Compared to the other approaches I’ve seen so far, such as EZ tessellation or variations on square twists, this design has the advantage of being flat. However, when one looks from the side, one can get a feeling of depth like in a woodcut or another printmaking technique: the pixels look as if eaten away from the smooth background. The anaglyph image (for viewing with red-cyan glasses) gives an idea of the depth.
Following the woodcut analogy, I tried to make a print using this tessellation (through paper in order to not discolor it) but it didn’t work out.
However, I think that using origami @tessellations for printing is an idea worth exploring.
One of the images shows the tessellation after folding the basic molecules but before folding any corners in order to create the image
(so it’s basically a pure four-sink base tessellation at that phase).

Four-Sink-Base Tessellation
This kind of @tessellation is not very interesting in itself, but has been invented and used by many authors independently as basis for more advanced designs.
I also came up with this design at some point and used it for my Saturn Tessellation.
It seems different names are in use for the molecule, but the name I picked up is Four-Sink-Base, used by Meenakshi Mukerji. There is an interesting discussion about where this model and its name came from in comments below this flickr post.

Radial Zig-Zag Tessellation
This is a rather obvious variant of the classic Zig Zag Corrugation, so it’s certainly been done by others before. This model was mostly free-folded with only the radial lines folded to exact angles.
Acryl on Elephant Hide paper.

Ruff Corrugation
A very simple design, so it’s probably been invented before. Inspired by Pineapple Tessellation and its variants. Paper aspect ratio of approximately 5:1.

Hugging Triangles Corrugation
At first sight you might see only octagons and squares in this corrugation. But, in my opinion, the interesting part is the small triangles placed pairwise in the squares’ corners. When the paper is relaxed, you can see S-shaped forms there, but when the model is squeezed, the triangles become more obvious and they look as if each pair was intersecting.
I used a grid for the design phase but then I cheated a little and drew the grid on the back side instead of folding it in order to get a cleaner look in the final model.

Super-Pineapple Tessellation (Extreme Double Pineapple Tessellation)
This is my design which extends Ilan Garibi’s Pineapple Tessellation. In this version, the pineapple is larger: the central pleated part is two grid diagonals long instead of one and there are five instead of three radial pleats. Each molecule is folded from an 11×11 grid, so the whole 4-molecule model with 1-grid-unit margins uses a 24×24 grid.
This model was published in Ilan’s book under the name Extreme Double Pineapple Tessellation, which better matches the other variants presented there while Super-Pineapple Tessellation is the name I originally used.

Stars and Squares Tessellation
Yet another fine example of me reinventing the wheel. After I designed this pattern, I found out it had been already published — in 1982 (!) — by no less than
Shuzo Fujimoto. According to the description of this model, folded by Raymonde Bonnefille, the crease pattern can be found in Fujimoto’s Invitation to Creative Playing with Origami (創造する折り紙遊びへの招待). Since I don’t have the book and could not find any name for this tessellation, I refer to it by the name I planned for my “original” design, Stars and Squares. Update: now that I’ve got all of
Fujimoto’s books, I still can’t find any name for this model other than it’s one of his translucent designs (The image is marked C7 in Twist Origami I but that seems to be more of an image caption than model name). The ID in Catalog of Fujimoto’s Works is
CFW 53.
Folding is very simple: the squares are just Kawasaki/Square Twists and the stars are the same twists with the radial angles of the squares bisected and tucked below each other (this process is called pursing — thanks for your remarks, Robin Scholz). Each molecule requires a 4×4 grid, so the whole model featured here uses a 24×16 grid. This is a pretty good model to teach @tessellations to beginners: it’s not much harder than plain Square Twists but looks much more interesting.
Compare with Stars and Triangles which is this design’s analog on the hex grid.
Folded from Elephant Hide paper, inkjet-colored magenta. More about this coloring method in a separate blog post.

Bed of Nails Tessellation (Long Nail Variant)
This variant of my Bed of Nails Tessellation features longer nails, which have additionally been sharpened at the tips compared to the basic version.
Based on a 32×50 grid (11×10 per molecule, including margins of 1 and 2 grid units (horizontal/vertical)).
Folded from a single sheet of copper-colored metallic paper.

Bed of Nails Tessellation
I was inspired to design this tessellation resembling a bed of nails after a comment from 
P. Colman on flickr regarding my
Fenced Tiling of Fujimoto’s Clover Folding.
This tessellation is based on just the “leaves” of the clover, made two-sided and arranged into multiple rows.
A single molecule uses a 6×4 grid and one can vary the borders around them in both directions in order to control the nails’ density. This particular fold is based on a 21×30 grid which results in 3×5 finished nails (7×6 grid for each, so margins are 1 and 2 grid units). One can vary the nails’ length or fold the edges of the nails inside, transforming them into triangular spikes.
I also see some potential for creating pixel images, in a manner similar to EZ Tessellation, by bending some of the nails.
Folded from a single sheet of Elephant Hide paper, inkjet-printed for a more metallic look.
In 2016, I came up with an enhancement of this design, Bed of Nails 3D Tessellation.

Fenced Tiling of Clover Folding
I designed this tiling of Shuzo Fujimoto’s Clover Folding after I saw the tiling by Peter Budai and thought it would be better to make the borders between molecules with the nice petals that appear on each individual clover. These petals go straight up, creating a kind of fence around each molecule.
I believe this to be a new design but please let me know in case you’ve seen it elsewhere before.

Down the Rabbit Hole
This tessellation consists of concentric square twists of growing size. The medium is self-adhesive holographic foil glued onto tracing paper.
The spiral is a fractal and with larger paper could be extended indefinitely with more and more levels.
Just after I designed this piece, I realized it was so simple that someone had probably invented it before. After a bit of searching on flickr, I realized
I had just designed from scratch a tessellation almost identical to the Hill/Bump model by Matt Humberstone which I had seen on flickr and faved just a few days before. It’s disappointing when what you thought was an original design shows to have been designed by others a few years before. The only difference is that in my model the initial twist is based on a 2:1 slope and Matt’s starts with a 3:1 slope.
As a consequence, my version should be folded from an odd-numbered grid (the one in the picture is from 25×25 grid including an extra-wide frame).
My model also lacks the locks holding the model together in the corners because it was designed up-front to be viewed from the “tunnel” and not from the “hill” side. Since it was designed to be flat, there are small additional creases that prevent it from bulging upwards.
Later, I found the same design created also by others independently.

Hydrangea Picture Frame
This picture frame can hold a standard 15×10 cm photograph. It consists of four molecules of the Hydrangea Tessellation
(designed by Shuzo Fujimoto), spaced apart in such way that a picture can be inserted into the space between them.
My sister-in-law Bogna gave me the idea of making a photo frame when I showed her the standard low-density Hydrangea tess.
The picture is held in place only at its corners by the petals on the inner edge of the frame. The picture’s edges are not covered by the frame at all, so almost all the area of the image is visible. Despite such small tabs, the picture sits inside the frame quite securely.
The size of the hydrangea flowers and the thickness of the frame relative to the size of the area used for the picture can be made arbitrarily large or small.
This requires a bit of calculation to lay out the paper well (tip: the picture’s edge lies at 13/16 of the width of the Hydrangea molecule). Precise folding is required, especially if you want to make the frame narrow relative to picture size.
If you fold the frame a little bit too small and the picture bulges when you try to insert it, you can pierce the paper edge which is hidden under the petals on the inner edge of the frame with a knife. The picture’s corners will then be able to go through the slits instead of being pressed against the paper so that a larger picture can fit in.
I later found the same idea independently developed by others (for example here). Many folders do not adapt the proportions of the hydrangeas relative to the free space available for the picture, though.

Hydrangea Icosahedron
After I made a Hydrangea Cube, Hydrangea Icosahedron was the next logical step. Just as in the cube, the Hydrangea Tessellation by Shuzo Fujimoto is used as a modular unit.
The method of modifying and connecting individual elements was first published by Meenakshi Mukerji but at a later time I came up with the same design independently.
The modified tessellation unit has properties very similar to the Sonobe unit, so other, larger assemblies that can be made with Sonobe units can be made with Hydrangeas as well.
The head-on view nicely shows the pentagonal symmetry of the spiked icosahedron while the close-up shows details of the tessellation.
As for the back-lit picture, I took it when the model was not complete yet by placing a lamp inside it to generate a strong back-light.

Knobby Cube
Another combination of  Building Block Units and @tessellations, this time
Fujimoto’s Clover Folding, folded without the decorative margin.
18 modules:
6 × BBU D4, 6 × A1,
6 × Clover Tessellation (level 2, from 16×16 grid).

Square Weave Cube
This is a modular cube made of six Square Weave Tessellations. The connection method is mine, the authorship of the Square Weave Tessellation seems to be disputed but it seems to go back to Shuzo Fujimoto.
Tabs that connect the model are rather small, so the model is not very stable, but it can support itself and with a little care it can be handled.
Compare with the Woven Cube for a similar effect achieved using four much simpler units for each face.

Hydrangea Cube
I came up with the idea of connecting Hydrangeas to form a modular origami design independently, then found out Meenakshi Mukerji had published it in her book before. Units behave somewhat similar to
Sonobe and can be used for making models of similar structure (for another example, see
Hydrangea Icosahedron).

Clover Cube
This model is a combination of Building Block Units and Fujimoto’s
Clover Folding. The models amounts to 18 units, 12 of which are BBUs
(6 × D10 variant, 6 × A1) and 6 are Clover Folding Tessellations (level 2, each from 16×16 grid).

Hexagonal Honeycomb
This structure can be extended indefinitely to fill the plane with a hexagonal pattern. By adding more layers it can also be expanded up and down.
78 modules:
60 × C1, 18 × A4.

