Editor’s Note: Scroll down for information on Madonna’s new free online course, Summer of Twists.
Origami tessellations are repeating patterns folded from a single sheet of paper, but there’s not just one style or level of difficulty to this kind of origami. There are patterns with curved folds, patterns with 3D elements, patterns that need to be fully precreased before collapsing, and patterns that are folded one twist at a time. The easiest way to get started  is with grid-based tessellations using intersections of pleats (like Spread Hexagons in “Origami @Tessellations” by Eric Gjerde) and then practicing the basic twists to start folding tessellations one twist at a time. The freedom in starting from a grid and folding one twist at a time is that it’s possible to fold thousands of different patterns from that grid. In the beginning, this freedom is daunting, and I encourage my students to draw the crease pattern (CP) on their grid and precrease as needed. Once you’ve mastered the basic twists, you can make different choices of spacing and twist to create variations on the fly.
So, what are these basic twists?
When Shuzo Fujimoto first folded twist-based origami tessellations, he used only the closed forms of the triangle, square, and hexagon twists. By the time I started folding tessellations in 2017, open forms of all of these twist shapes were commonly used, as were rhombus and right triangle twists. (See the closed and open twists in the photos below.) There are more advanced twists, such as stacked twists, iso-area twists, trapezoid twists and mixed-depth rhombus twists in Joel Cooper’s masks
 and the most advanced flagstone designs, but the bulk of the photos I used for reverse engineering were made of only the eight most basic twists.
Using these eight twists, hundreds — if not thousands — of origami tessellations can be folded. Many are quite simple, using only left- and right-handed forms of the same twist or alternating between two different twists.
You can continue using these familiar twists in more advanced tessellations if you increase the structural complexity. The structure of an origami tessellation refers to what twist shapes are used and how these shapes are connected by pleats. These structures are usually represented by a tiling, where any two shapes in the tiling that share an edge will have a pleat connecting them. There are two ways to add complexity: by increasing the number of vertices of the tiling (from a 1-uniform to a 2- or 3-uniform tiling) or by changing how the symmetry points are arranged on a simple tiling (by creating different colorings of the tiling.). Neither of these options have theoretical limits on the number of designs that are possible. The only real limit is how much time you’re willing to spend gridding and how big your paper is. In fact, I’ve found over 40 tessellation designs that use only open hexagon and closed triangle twists — and that search was limited to patterns that fit three repeats inside of 80 grid divisions.
Sometimes I use more advanced twists to resolve symmetry constraints in a design or to create pattern elements that are impossible with the basic twists. These twists are good tools to be aware of, but not strictly necessary to learn to fold origami tessellations. I’d recommend learning twists one at a time and practicing that one twist until you’ve internalized how it works. This is my approach to teaching tessellation folding in  
Basic Twists Bootcamp and 
@Tessellation Starter Sequence, my paid courses on starting to fold tessellations and learning to read crease patterns. My free  
@Tessellation Foundations resource introduces my top gridding techniques alongside basic skills like reordering pleat overlaps, and it’s a good way to learn your first two twists — the closed square and closed triangle twists.
I’m excited to announce a new free challenge: Summer of Twists. Each of the 30 video tutorials in Summer of Twists will teach you a different twist, including all eight basic twists plus 22 more advanced options. Whether you fold all 30 or stick to the eight most basic, you’re sure to learn something new about folding origami tessellations. Each tutorial is paired with a longer video tutorial that teaches how to use the twist in the context of a tessellation pattern, so you could come out of the challenge with 30 finished pieces in addition to your 30 twist demonstrations. The crease patterns for these longer tutorials are available at The Source in the “Summer of Twists” ebook, which also includes a bonus crease pattern for each twist so you can test your new folding skills.
The Summer of twists tutorials are being released on my YouTube channel. They began on June 3 on a Monday-Wednesday-Friday schedule and will continue until August 9. You you can sign up for email reminders to make sure you don’t miss a single one.
Learning to fold twists doesn’t just make you a better @tessellation folder, and it’s not just for folders who are already completing complex models from diagrams. My students often remark that they’ve seen all of their origami skills improve after studying @tessellations — from predicting what the paper will look like after a fold is made to reading complex diagrams to folding precisely. Folding tessellations has improved it all. They also tell me that when something stressful is happening in their lives they just want to sit and grid, keeping their minds and hands occupied without trying to figure out something new. Whatever your motivation for folding tessellations, I’d advise starting with grids, pleats, and basic twists, folded one at a time. There’s a whole world of twists and tessellations out there — will you explore it with me?


March 14 is the International Day of Mathematics. This date was chosen due to the relationship between the date 3/14 and the number 3.14, the approximate value of the enigmatic number pi (π).
This year’s theme is “Playing with Math,” and I have created a special model that I wanted to share with people who like origami and mathematics, it can also be shared in class by students and teachers.
The pieces can form various mosaic-like puzzles, with diverse shapes and wide creative possibilities.
I am David Medina, a mathematics teacher, and I am part of the Origami Educational Association in Peru. I participated in the OrigamiUSA 2021 online convention, where I taught an origami alpaca by Carlos Pomarino.
Paolo Bascetta diagrammed my model and gave me permission to share it.


Advent of Tess has become a beloved holiday tradition, with a new mini tessellation tutorial released every day from December 1 through Christmas Day. The 2023 patterns were completely new, and they introduced trapezoid twists, too.
These patterns start out accessible to any folder and progressively introduce new twists and ideas until you arrive at advanced skills like open rhombus twists, overlapping twists, trapezoid twists and flagstone techniques. The challenge is free to join.
There was a lot more focus this year on the alternate endings possible after a given mini tessellation start, with short videos on these endings accompanying each tutorial.
When you  
sign up for Advent of Tess, you’ll have access to all the tutorials immediately and also get daily reminders for each of the 25 days of the challenge. You can sign up at any time and take however long you like to finish, and there’s no such thing as “too late.”
You’ll be joining hundreds of origami folders around the world in trying out or revisiting @tessellation techniques and expanding the possibilities you can see in a single sheet of paper.
All the grids used in Advent of Tess are exactly the same — 16 divisions on a hexagon, parallel to the edges of the paper — and I walk you through how to cut out a hexagon and fold that grid in the welcome video of the challenge.
If you’d like to use my favorite papers and tools, you can find them on my website: a full paper pack including tools, a pack of just the paper
 or an ebook of crease patterns with more repeats of the 25 challenge pieces plus 31 alternate endings. The ebook is also available through The Source.


“Fractal Origami for Beginners” by Ushio Ikegami is unusual but important in mathematical, geometric origami design. Speaking personally, whenever I see an origami artist refer to a model of theirs as a “fractal” I have to smirk inside. In math the word fractal is used to describe geometric objects that have unusual properties with their length, area, or volume. For example, a “fractal curve” would be a curve in the 2D plane that has infinite length but surrounds or contains a finite area. A circle does not do that — it has finite perimeter and surrounds a finite area. Thus, fractal curves have to be very strange. They often look bumpy and jagged. In contrast, there are many geometric origami models that are called fractal even though they do not have this infinite perimeter property. Rather, these so-called origami fractals possess a type of repeated symmetry (often called self-similarity) that is also present in many fractals. But simply having this type of repeated symmetry does not make something a fractal.
On the other hand, Ushio Ikegami’s origami fractals truly are fractals. His first success at making a real origami fractal was his Fractal Pyramid, which was used for the logo of the 4OSME conference in 2006,
 but which was so complicated to actually fold that diagrams were not published until 2021, here, in The Fold. In fact, these diagrams are more of a method for attempting this model. Why? because the infinite perimeter versus finite area aspect of fractal curves (which, incidentally, provides another solution, the Tree Curve in the article, to the famous  Napkin Folding Problem means that achieving more and more detail in an origami fractal design requires altering the crease pattern quite a bit at each iteration, something drastically different than what one sees in more simple self-similar origami designs.
In other words, a non-traditional approach to origami is required when trying to fold origami fractals. Therefore, it makes sense that when trying to communicate his ideas, Ushio decided to present them in a non-traditional way. Enjoy!
— Thomas Hull
This paper, though I would rather call it just a note, is a discussion about the most esoteric and least-studied origami research field: recursive origami of multi-directional growth. Although Ushio, the author, refers to it as fractal origami or fractal folding, the actual theme in these strange pages is how to construct a multi-directional recursive folding system. However closely related these two are, they are not the same thing. Despite his lack of awareness of academic preciseness, I am truly willing to acknowledge that in every aspect, this paper is a remarkable milestone in this field and will live a long life as the one and only available reference for all the people interested in this topic both casually and seriously. It has everything that one needs to know: theory, approach and basic exercises leading the reader to the top-notch projects that no one, even the author himself, I believe, has ever dealt with.
Reading through his writing, you will soon notice that his sense of date is oddly wrong. The publication of the diagrams of Fractal Pyramid in The Fold was not “in May” of this year. It was in May of 2021. This is because I had received this manuscript from him a couple of months after the publication of the diagrams and was waiting his reply to my editing request through 2021 and 2022. (I still am.) To answer questions from curious readers and to assuage my grief, I shall recount what happened during our exchange over the manuscript.
Although the significance of Ushio’s paper was clear enough, it was difficult to publish it even on a web page. His writing was quite informal and tended to get metaphysical in places, unlike a technical paper. Furthermore, Figure 21 showed nothing more than a sketchy drawing; it should have provided readers with a reasonable amount of information to convince them to follow the fundamental change in the design structure. I asked Ushio to revise the writing entirely with details for Figure 21. He returned, to my surprise, an email next morning, simply saying “I would prefer not to.” I sat awhile in perfect silence, rallying my stunned faculties, after which I promptly replied asking the same thing in a confused manner. “Do you not see the reason for yourself?” he indifferently replied. It seemed to me that while I had been asking him, he carefully revolved every statement that I made; fully comprehended the meaning; could not gainsay the irresistible conclusion; but, at the same time, some paramount consideration prevailed with him to reply as he did. Utterly perplexed, I asked once again what he meant by that. He did not answer and has not contacted me since then.
During the tough time of the pandemic, this matter almost faded into oblivion. It was not until recently that I found a copy of the manuscript I had printed out in 2021. In a brief tranquil moment staring in the tired sheets of paper in my hands, I told myself that for the sake of the future folding culture, I must not let them remain undiscovered, and I consulted with our mutual friend, Dr. Thomas C. Hull, for a possible means of publication. Under Dr. Hull’s careful examination, the manuscript is being released intact in The Fold, as it was when I first received it. (Except for the last passage running some 80 words, which was completely off topic — we had to delete it.)
What the author says in this paper is astonishingly simple and viable. Hasty folders would get ready in 40 seconds to jump into its exercises or their own creations. Some might even see things people would not believe (like fires off the shoulder of Orion or C-beams glittering in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate). However, regardless of how empowering it is, anything you do in this field requires an immense amount of dedication. Going through the first batch of problems from Exercise 1.1 to Project 1.3 could easily encompass an entire four years of university study. By the time you get to Project 4.3, you will have spent at least a solid one score years out of the three and a half we all are supposed to have received at birth. Even strong fourscore years shall not make any difference. It is a grave life decision. Of course, there is always a chance of an ingenuous novice nonchalantly sweeping them all, like Jack Smurch, the greatest man in the world, did in the history of aviation on July 17, 1937 — but it also cost his life despite the immediate hospitalization right after his perfect landing on Roosevelt Field. Though someone gallant might still give it a go, what is expected most likely is decades of awful wandering and a sheer dead end, where the author may be lying dead (stone-still, wax-white, paper-thin). It is not worth risking your life like that, otherwise guaranteed happy and well. To tell you the truth, my conscience is still in doubt whether this paper should be published. What is the point of disclosing a horrifying black hole to the world? In a sense, it would be a fair statement that I am only presenting what I witnessed through the 20 years of our friendship: the author’s will to pursue what he longed for.
It was in the lounge of the mathematics department at Princeton University, filled with the warm sunlight of spring or early summer, that I met Ushio for the first time. He was with Chris K. Palmer, who was visiting a friend of his, Dr. John Horton Conway. There were a couple of colleagues at the table. I had known Ushio was staying in the U.S. for a while through the courtesy of OrigamiUSA and Makoto Yamaguchi. I took advantage of that unexpected opportunity by casually joining them, and we have been friends ever since. Ushio did not talk much then but I recall his showing a biaxial flasher and a four-piece modular icosahedron. His choice of study during that rather short stay abroad looked reasonable, as opposed to making origami fractals a prime focus, ruining any chance of the world seeing any other new designs from him. On the contrary, after going back to Japan, he started working exclusively on fractal subjects. I used to warn him not to do so for fear of narrowing his potential creativity and harming his future career in origami by going too far into a minor field. Rumor says that Mr. Yamaguchi warned him of the same thing. Although fortunately Ushio was able to keep achieving new results in the fractal field, the versatility that I saw in the U.S. did not really flourish back in Japan. I must confess to having developed unaffected scorn towards his short-sighted stubbornness during that period. However, if personality is an unbroken series of successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him. It had nothing to do with that flabby impressionability, which is dignified under the name of the “creative temperament” — it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again.
After all, no matter what field or profession you are in, or are going to get in, you will be asked the same question over and over: “Are you going to stay in this field, or not?” Either choice is right, as long as you are fine with it. Ushio said yes in his youth; and said no at the midpoint of his life. That is all fine. He will find a next life sometime soon. I do not mean the circle of transmigration here — it is the same with the rest of us struggling going through everyday life. I assume this paper proposes not only challenges in origami but also an insight into the question forever facing mankind: Are you ready to stay or not? The question is spoken, heedless of our readiness. Time goes by faster and faster leaving behind us mortals doomed to die, like a wind impossible to chase after.
John Ray, Jr., Ph.D.
December 5, 2023
P.S., If you ever see Ushio someday somewhere, maybe on social media, since the net is vast and limitless, please tell him I still have his jar of mayonnaise.
Copy editing by Jane Rosemarin.


Editor’s note: If you would like to fold any of the tessellations shown in this article, there are two resources you may use. First, if you have a cutter, you can download the SVG patterns directly from the article by right clicking on a PC or control clicking on a Mac. We have also compiled a PDF booklet with one crease pattern per page. You can download it here.
~~~~
The Miura Ori is a well-known origami corrugation named after the astrophysicist Koryo Miura, who proposed it in 1985 as a way to pack solar panels for deployment in space.1,2 The crease pattern is made up of parallelograms, which when folded, lie completely flat. 3 (important - please read) The other important property is that the individual parallelograms forming the pattern remain rigid in the folding process and after. Since that time, origami designers have used the basic idea behind the Miura Ori to create many interesting and delightful variations.
The set of ideas presented in this article is yet more variations – but under a unifying framework, which I have called Sourdough Miura Ori. This name comes from my making sourdough bread at home, where I was pinching and pushing the dough together, and stretching and pulling it outward.
Now, let’s imagine that all these movements are applied to a flat sheet of square dough that has no thickness and infinite elasticity, so it does not break when you stretch it out. This special piece of dough has the Miura Ori crease pattern printed on it. Mathematically, these movements (or in more technical terms, operations) are covered in a branch of mathematics called topology. What we are effectively doing in this article, is applying topological transformation to the Miura Ori, without going into the mathematical details.
Note that some of the resulting models from these dough-pulling operations have already been created by other designers, such as Paul Jackson, Ray Schamp, Jun Mitani and Ekaterina Lukasheva, among others. However, the primary goal of this article is to present the framework and method, rather than the end results.
Let’s pinch and push together all the Miura Ori zigzags at one end of the sheet so the distance between these creases reduces. This means the sheet will now look like the picture below. So far, so good. Interesting, but not THAT interesting.
Let’s stretch the two non-parallel sides of the dough from Variation 1 all the way around, so that these edges joint together. We now get a Miura Ori in a circle.
In the drawing below, I have used 16 zigzags, but you can use any even number, and it would still work. The number of zigzags has to be even because they need to alternate between mountain (M) and valley (V) (see Endnote 3). If the number is odd, we will end up with a M next to an M, or a V next to a V, which just would not work.
The photo of this variation is taken from directly above the model, so it is not apparent that the model does not lie flat. In fact, it exhibits the same curved surface that results from folding alternating mountain-valley concentric circles.
You can see this better in the side view:
Also, as you may have noticed, I have cut out a circle from the middle. But this is not a necessary step, since all the creases could converge at the center of the circles (and form a peak or trough, per Variation 9 and some of the examples after). However, I apply this cut to most of the variations because it makes folding easier.
If you wish, you can also straighten all the circle segments, connecting the corners of the adjacent zigzags. So, rather than concentric circles, you will have concentric polygons. In the example above, the result will be a 16-gon, the crease pattern of which I will leave for you as an exercise.
Now, let’s keep stretching the outside of the circle. The crease pattern below is what we would get. (Geometrically speaking, the circles are still concentric but the distance between each circle increases the farther away we get from the center).
Unlike the previous variation, this one seems to be fairly flat when not too compressed, and slightly curved when compressed, but to a lesser degree than Variation 2.
It is also possible to draw concentric circles with a different distance between each circle, similarly to if you pull the dough out, then push it back together, then pull it out a bit again and push it back together. I won’t do a drawing here, but you can probably get the picture.
Now let’s evenly stretch both the left and the right sides of the circle from Variation 3. We end up with an ellipse that is symmetric along the vertical axis.
This variation is also reasonably flat from the side.
Next, we stretch just the left-hand side of the circle in Variation 3. We will end up with an ellipse, but the center is off to one side.
And from the side, this variation looks reasonably flat but with a bit of an incline on the left side because of the wider zigzags.
What if we stretch out the circle from Variation 2 (but using only 12 zigzags rather than 16) in six different places at once, so you get a 6-lobed blob?
And what if we really stretch out the points so that the shape becomes more “starry”? Well, the answer is that it will still work. And, in fact, the result is interesting, with its many undulating curved surfaces.
This stretching was applied to five regions on the circle, forming a wonky 5-pointed star with rounded points and troughs.
(A quick note on drawing for this pattern: I am not using mathematics to shift the concentric-circle Miura Ori into a concentric rounded-stars/blob Miura Ori, but rather drawing it empirically using Inkscape. In the drawing of zigzags, you might need to make minor adjustments so that they don’t cut across the concentric blobs/stars in order to touch the rounded points. The way I did it, was simply to move the sharp point of the zigzag such that it touches a place near the rounded point that has the same tangent as the straight line, as in the drawing below, from the sharp blue corner, to the sharp red corner.
This method of shifting the corners of the zigzags is not very mathematical and will probably annoy purists. But since there is no stretchable paper with zero thickness in real life, I am happy to make small practical adjustments to get things to work).
What if we straighten the lines of the six-lobed blob in Variation 6, so that all the lobes become pointy and we get something like a wonky straight-lined star?
This pattern is foldable. But if we want a flat surface for each polygon in the folded model in order to maintain rigidity (and also to maintain uniformity for aesthetic reasons), it is not going to work because of the numerous concave quadrilaterals (quadrilaterals with one or more internal angles over 180 degrees), such as the two highlighted below.
Fortunately, this is a problem easily solved by adding extra creases. First, we connect the points of the star to the center points. This method will take care of all the concave quadrilaterals located along these new lines, splitting them up and turning them all into triangles.
Next, we look at the remaining quadrilaterals (the ones that lie along the “troughs” of the concentric stars). As you can see, some of them are concave (red) but some are convex (blue). But all in the innermost ring, are convex.
If a quadrilateral is not concave, there is actually no need to add any extra crease and divide the shape up into triangles. However, if you do put those extra creases into all the rings except for the innermost one, irrespective of whether the quadrilateral is concave or convex, it will give the design better “compressibility” (that is, you can push the perimeter of the paper into the center better). And this is the result.
But what are the MV assignment of these straight lines from the peaks/troughs of the star to the center that have been added? The first thing to note is that when you move from one concentric star to the next, the segment switches from M to V, or V to M, that is, they alternate. So, if you can work out the MV assignment of the creases on outermost ring, the rest will follow.4
But how do we do that? Well, it appears the MV assignment depends on whether the crease starts at the point of the star, or the trough of the star. And then, it depends on the MV assignment of the zigzag that has its sharp point touching that line. The rules to follow, from observation, are listed in the table below:5
There is likely to be a mathematical proof of why these rules work, but I will have to leave it for someone more mathematically capable than I am.
This pattern can be observed again in Variation 8 below.
In the previous variation, we had only one zigzag for each peak-trough section of the 6-pointed star. Could we possibly add more zigzags into each of the peak-trough section? It looks like the answer is yes. As long as the total number of zigzags within the entire design is even (per the note in Variation 2), we can add as many zigzags into each segment as we like.
Here is a crease pattern where we have two zigzags for each peak-trough section of a regular 5-pointed star.
And below is the crease pattern if we add one more zigzag in the middle of the two zigzags from before.
You could also choose not to have the same number of zigzags in each peak-trough section within the star. As long as you follow all the rules listed in Endnote 3! and Variation 7, your design can be folded.
What if we rotate the original Miura Ori crease pattern by 90 degrees and stretch it into a circle?
~~~~
There are other crease pattern variations that I have not included here, such as nested circles of different sizes that are not concentric or stacking: Variation 1 with an upside-down version of itself vertically (so we get an hourglass perimeter) or horizontally (so we get a parallelogram) or combinations of the variations above, such as turning ellipses into blobs or stars. What I have presented here is not an exhaustive list, and you can experiment to make up your own variations.
~~~~
One related note I would like to add is a computer program called “Freeform Origami,” created by Tomohiro Tachi. On Freeform Origami, you start with a crease pattern, and the program simulates the resulting 3D model. You can then stretch and push the 3D model, one point at a time, and the crease pattern is modified accordingly.
(This is obviously a bit different from what we are doing here, since we are stretching and pushing the starting crease pattern rather than the resulting 3D model.)
The program is free, and you can download it from Tomohiro’s webpage. I would fully recommend playing with it to see what you can come up with.
(Unfortunately, the program can be a bit fiddly to run. I have two Windows computers at home, both running Windows 10, and I have never managed to get it to work on either machine).
Now the next question – can we apply the same pinching and stretching processes using other Miura Ori related crease patterns as a starting point?
Let’s try it with a reflected Miura Ori pattern with the crease pattern below (for which the MV assignment rules 1 and 3 in Endnote 3 still apply and mirrored zigzags have the same MV assignment).
Similarly to Variation 2, this one does not lie flat (see picture on left, below).  But unlike Variation 2, which has two opposing peaks and troughs, this one seems to be able to be pushed into having four alternating peaks and troughs (see picture on right right).
And an elliptical version of the same:
All the other variations, such as stretching into blobs and stars from the regular Miura Ori earlier (variations 6 to 9) should be foldable as well. But I have not tested them.
~~~~
Now, what about turning everything into curves? Well, it is possible to round out the zigzags so they are curved. In my upcoming book with Ilan Garibi, we look at how to create tessellations with curves using straight-lined tessellations as a base. Without going too much into the content of the book, the design below started as an off-center radial Miura Ori, with increasing distance between each circle, stretched into an ellipse, with the zigzags replaced by Bezier curves. The “rings” of ellipses have also been removed as hard creases since they are not necessary (and in fact their removal makes the design look much more fluid and aesthetically pleasing). This photo is taken looking straight down at the model and not at an angle.
And here is the next question: Are there other patterns that these operations can be applied to beyond the Miura Ori and its variations? The answer is yes. It seems if the pattern is primarily linear (basically made of molecules that can be laid out next to each other in parallel), then this framework should be applicable. But the drawing, and associated mathematics, will become quite complicated.
Below is the curved version of the Ron Resch Triangle Tessellation, which was used as a base.
Applying the method of Variation 2, with seven rotational symmetries (rather than the 16 in the Miura Ori above) gave me this pattern below (with thanks to Stuart Errol Anderson, who drew the base pattern for me).
The straight-lined triangles on the outermost ring in the crease pattern, between the curved triangles, are simply locks to keep structure together.
As you can see, this is a very interesting pattern. The two photos have the same crease pattern and the same MV assignment, but the pattern can yield two different outcomes, similarly to when you turn a woolen beanie inside out — except that these two models have different paper tension and topology, and you cannot flip them in and out like fabric because of the locks along the edge of the paper.
Applying the method of Variation 8 using the straight-line version of the Resch design6 gives me the pattern below and interesting front and back views (with thanks to Gömöri András, who came up with a base pattern based on my incomplete description of what I wanted to do, which I then expanded via trial and error).
These two crease patterns are also stretchable into ovals (and possibly n-sided blobs and stars as well), although I have only tried folding one of these variations.
In this elliptical version, I had to take out most of the creases for the locks in the crease pattern because the locking creases’ positions and angles need to shift once you stretch the crease pattern out from a circle. New flat-foldable locking creases can be put in, but I simply folded them via angle bisection on the paper when I made the model.
And just like the original circle version, the elliptical version can also be made inside-out.
Other designers have made radial versions of linear tessellations, for example, Ben Parker and Fernando Sierra, with their radial Yoshimura pattern, and Ekaterina Lukasheva, with her various spiral designs. You can find these on their respective social media pages.
As you can see, this framework is conceptually very simple, and can give you many variations of a base pattern. It should also be codeable, if you are so inclined. I hope you will have a go at applying these methods and come up with your own design and have fun in the process!
1. The design has existed in fashion and napkin folding, made using fabric, before then.[back]
2. The Space Flyer Unit, a spacecraft launched by Japan in March 1995, deployed a 2D Array with a Miura Ori configuration.
 [back]
3. I am a little lazy with the drawings and did not put mountain and valley folds in this article. The reason is because they are very fiddly to do, particularly if I have to cut parts of a circle or ellipse into segments to change the line format to distinguish the two later on. When I score the pattern on a cutter, mountain-valley assignments are irrelevant, and I do not need to specify them on the drawing. However, to understand which creases are mountain and which are valley in the crease patterns in this article, there are three general rules:
These rules apply to ALL the variations from 1 to 9 and should help you understand the MV assignment of each crease. There are some complications, though, once we get to Variation 7, and we will go through how to deal with them. [back to introduction] [back to Variation 2] [back to Variation 8]
4. We could also start with the innermost ring. However, since there is no need to break up the quadrilaterals in the innermost ring into triangles, we will focus only on the outermost ring. [back]
5. In my experiments, I have tried folding the other way. But what that seems to do is unravel the zigzags completely.  [back]
6. It is possible to do this version using the curved version of the Resch design. However, it is much harder to fold and aesthetically not that interesting. [back]
Demaine, Erik and Martin Demaine. “History of Curved Origami Sculpture.” http://erikdemaine.org/curved/history/.
Jackson, Paul. Complete Pleats. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2015.
Kasahara, Kunihiko. Extreme Origami. New York: Sterling Publishing Co., 2003.
Lang, Robert. Twists, Tilings and @Tessellations – Mathematical Methods for Geometric Origami.  Abingdon: Taylor and Francis, 2018.
Lukasheva, Ekaterina. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/ekaterina.lukasheva/.
Mitani, Jun. Curved-Folding Origami Design. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2019.
Parker, Ben. Instagram. https://www.instagram.com/benparkerstudio/.
Resch, Ron. Ron Resch Official Website. http://www.ronresch.org/ronresch/gallery/paper-folding-origami/.
Sallas, Joan. Folded Beauty.  Chungju: Jong Ie Nara, 2018.
Schamp, Ray. Flickr.  https://www.flickr.com/photos/miura-ori/.
Sierra, Fernando. Flickr. https://www.flickr.com/photos/elelvis/.
Tachi, Tomohiro. “Freeform Variations of Origami.” Journal of Geometry and Graphics 14, no. 2  (2010).
Tachi, Tomohiro. TT’s Page (website) https://tsg.ne.jp/TT/index.html.
Absolutely beautiful work! I love seeing others work though a systematic approach to test all variations. As shown here, it leads to tangents that can offer totally new models and processes. Thank you for sharing!


Many origami folders have admired @tessellations from afar for years, intimidated by the apparent difficulty and the length of preparation needed just to get started. Others have dabbled in @tessellations at in-person or online conventions or in books but come away frustrated because they get lost and can’t continue or the instructions are unclear, or they aren’t able to recreate what they folded, much less extend it to fold repeats.
Folders often look for the right paper or the right tools to make tessellations easy but don’t realize that the way they’re attempting to fold the tessellation — by precreasing and collapsing — is much harder than folding twist by twist. Additionally, learning from a book is often much harder than learning from a recorded video with a top-down view, especially if those videos are coming from someone with hundreds of hours of @tessellation teaching experience.
It was with these facts in mind that I designed Advent of Tess — a series of recorded, online tutorials with supplemental crease patterns — to introduce @tessellation techniques to folders who had been intimidated by @tessellations in the past. More than 800 folders signed up to join me in a @tessellation exercise for which I released a new mini-tessellation tutorial each day from Dec. 1 to Dec. 25, 2022, Christmas Day.
These tutorials built skills gradually, moving from beginner level to high intermediate (on the @tessellation scale). I first introduced closed triangle twists, then closed hexagons, open hexagons, open triangles, closed rhombi and open rhombi, while showing the various possibilities of twists to put around a given starting setup.
Since everything was folded on a 16-fold triangle grid on a hexagon, it was easy to prepare paper in advance, and several folders prepped all of their grids before starting the tutorials. The limited paper size also made the patterns more approachable: something to fold in 30 minutes instead of two-plus hours.
That’s not to say that people didn’t struggle — they definitely did — but it was easy to get help in the community I set up for the challenge, and my longtime students even offered to set up Zoom meetings and help in real time. When I checked my statistics at the end of the month, I saw that at least 40 people were posting photos of their own folds every day, and I know that many more were folding without posting.
So, why am I sharing this now? Because you can still participate.
If you’ve been looking to get into @tessellations the easy way, I don’t know of any better resource (and many comments I’ve received agree). It’s free, it walks you through step-by-step, there’s no precreasing after the grid is done, and you can get daily reminders with extra guidance by signing up through my site.
 The videos are also on YouTube, so you can translate the captions into whatever language you prefer.
And once you’re done with the challenge, I have videos 
 here and
 here to help you apply these patterns to larger grids.
So, go ahead and start folding the tessellations of your dreams today. I’d love to see what you make!
I’ve only folded a couple of the tessellations… but worth working thru… Madonna is a great instructor and this is an amazing resource for any folder!
I have folded all the tessellations from Advent of Tess, and Madonna Yoder has taught each one very clearly. Suggest all them to try it out.
-@theprofessorsorigami


Editors’ Note: This article was collaboratively written by four young origami enthusiasts and edited for clarity by The Fold’s editorial team. The students have a GoFundMe campaign to support a trip to NASA headquarters. More information on this is at the end of the article.
We are Jimmy in the Box, a team of high school and middle school students who enjoy  juggling origami and computers. In October 2021, we won a global championship at the 2021 NASA Space Apps Challenge
through a project to make origami versions of the James Webb Space Telescope and integrate them with tiny computers called Raspberry Pi. We are excited to be one of 10 global winners (we won in the arts and technology category). Our project was selected from 4,534 teams worldwide (28,286 participants from 162 countries) by NASA as well as space programs from nine other nations.
This article summarizes our journey to reach the pinnacle of an international science and technology event.
Our group came together via the Kids IoT (Internet of Things)
program, a local voluntary program for K-12 students who are interested in computers, electronics and coding. The program offers lecture-based classes about Raspberry Pi computers, Python coding and cloud data storage. It also organizes hackathons, where students make and demonstrate self-made and self-programmed devices such as alarm clocks, smart mirrors and sonic pest repellers.
Around the end of summer break in 2021, our coaches suggested that we enter the NASA Space Apps Challenge using what we had learned. The Space Apps Challenge is an annual international two-day event where NASA puts out about 30 challenges for participants (mostly grown-ups) to develop innovative solutions.
When we were choosing a challenge for our project, we found the Webb Origami Design Challenge interesting. The word “origami” caught our attention because we love, and are good at origami. All of us have been folding origami since we were toddlers.
The challenge we chose was to “create origami artwork that looks like the James Webb Space Telescope and showcases Webb as a technological and design marvel using an ‘art-meets-science’ approach.”
We did not know anything about the telescope at first but soon got excited about how it planned to use origamilike folding and unfolding for its launch and deployment. Webb is a space telescope, meaning it is intended to work in outer space. If you have heard of the Hubble Space Telescope, Webb is basically an upgraded version of it.
The following picture shows a full-scale model of the telescope.
As you can see, it is very big. Its base area is about the size of a tennis court, and its height is about 40 feet — far too big to fit into a rocket. NASA decided to fold it up to reduce its volume and unfold it after it is launched into space. The picture below shows how the telescope was folded and made ready for a launch.
Currently, the JWST has been fully deployed, and the first images are scheduled to be released on July 12, 2022.
This is how we ended up using origami and computers to model the Webb telescope at the NASA Space Apps Challenge in the first weekend of October 2021. Since the telescope’s unfolding process looks like the jack-in-the-box toy, we decided to call our team and project “Jimmy in the Box” after James Webb, a NASA administrator in the 1960s, for whom the telescope is named.
The most eye-catching part of the Webb telescope is the primary mirror. The mirror’s diameter is 21 feet. It is designed to collect light from the objects being observed. It has 19 hexagonal segments. The center segment, in black, is to mount the camera.
We modeled this mirror with a hexagonal origami tessellation. Tessellation is a tiling technique that repeats geometric patterns on a plane by folding a single sheet of paper. The picture below shows what we folded.
To fold this tessellation, you will need a hexagonal sheet of paper that is precreased with a triangle grid. The grid will be used as a guidance for the placement and orientation of tiled hexagons.
1. Cut out a regular hexagon from a sheet of paper. You may draw it using a compass and following the animated instructions:
Or, follow the instructions by Leyla Torres folding a hexagon from a square.
2. Fold the regular hexagon in halves from point to point, resulting in three diagonal creases.
3. Fold each edge to the center. This step gives you a division of four pleats in each direction (parallel to each diagonal).
4. Repeat the parallel creases until you have a division of 32 pleats in each direction.
With this pre-creased triangle grid, you are ready to start tiling hexagons.
First, locate the center of the grid and mark out a hexagon around it. The hexagon is four pleats across in all directions. Each of its sides is two triangles long. Then, repeat hexagons of the same size by following the video below. Text-only step-by-step instructions are also available online.
An instructional video for folding the Webb model:
The Webb telescope has a five-layer kite-shaped sunshield. The sunshield’s dimensions are 45 feet by 70 feet, which is similar to the size of a tennis court. It is designed to protect the telescope from warming and light pollution by blocking heat and light from the sun, Earth and moon.
To model this sunshield, we folded a long hexagon from a rectangular sheet of paper and stacked five of them. The five hexagons (in silver) are stacked with two origami springs (in gold).
The following video shows how to fold a long hexagon:
The following video shows how to fold a square spring:
We assembled our origami crafts to produce three prototype telescope models.
Since we wanted our models to actively do something, we integrated them with Raspberry Pi computers, cameras, GPS receivers and other equipment. A camera is attached at the center of an origami tessellation, and it is connected to a Raspberry Pi.
Our goal was to have our models do what the real telescope does: taking pictures, tracking the current position and measuring sunlight intensity and temperature.
Please visit our project web site for more technical details such as equipment purchase, circuit diagrams, software setup and coding.
It was a lot of fun to fold origami, program computers and learn about the world’s most powerful telescope. You can learn how to reproduce our origami artwork and telescope prototypes at our project web site. Our ultimate goal is to inspire as many people as possible who like arts, technology or both!
This project was fun and rewarding, but we had a few challenges. too. Since the event had a time limit — two days for project work with a specific deadline for outcome submission — it required our intensive commitment. Some of us spent at least eight hours on origami artwork, and others were up until late at night to fix computer troubles. We were very busy until the very last minute, making demonstration videos, completing project materials and rehearsing the project presentation. Another challenge was that we needed to communicate online only (with Zoom and Slack), not in person at all, due to Covid-19 restrictions.
This project led us to wonder what else we could transport to space with origami-inspired techniques. For example, could we send solar panels and other bulky items for future space stations? Possibly a space station itself? Maybe vehicles and housing structures for living on Mars? It is so exciting to see that origami can contribute to science and technology in space!
Lastly, let us announce that our team is currently fundraising to join the “Winners’ Trip,” which NASA organizes for global champion teams to visit their facilities. We want to take advantage of this opportunity to learn more about origami and technology for the future. We are planning to send donors origami gifts as a token of our appreciation (See some samples below.) Help us fly to NASA!
Takeshi Tatsumi is a teenage origami artist. He carries origami papers wherever he goes, takes inspiration from what he sees and what he feels, and gives it shape as paper artwork. Takeshi has made hundreds of paper crafts since he was 3 years old and developed international friendships in the U.S., Canada, and Japan through origami. He served as the lead origami designer for the Jimmy in the Box project. Currently a rising 10th grader, Takeshi has an online gallery to showcase his recent artwork. He also plans his own business to share the joy of paper folding and promote the art of origami.
Hanna Suzuki is a rising seventh grader who loves a fusion of arts and computer programming. She has worked on a summer science project about the Miura fold, which was used to fold and unfold the solar panel of a spacecraft. Hanna is a lifelong camper and micro-hiker on the Appalachian Trail. These days, she is thinking of a potential fusion of outdoor activities and programming. Hanna studies piano at the New England Conservatory and has been invited to Carnegie Hall for her recitals three times.
Yuto Yashiro is a rising sixth grader who loves soccer, video games and reading about the galaxy. His passion for origami was sparked by the Origami Kids Challenge,
 a fundraising campaign for participants to fold origami cranes — a symbol of hope and healing during challenging times — and help distribute meals to children and families in need. (Sponsors made a cash donation to Feeding America for each crane.) Yuto led a local initiative and contributed about 1,000 meals to the campaign. As a Raspberry Pi enthusiast, he regularly builds Internet of Things devices and occasionally teaches other kids how to use this mini-processor.
Misaki Tatsumi is an experienced paper folder who loves science and technology. While she was in grade 11 during the recently ended academic year, she formed and led the Jimmy in the Box team and oversaw many project phases from doing a survey about the Webb telescope to recording a demonstration video. Misaki carried out a research project last summer to study immersive virtual reality (VR) for the medical field, particularly pediatrics. She reported her work in a refereed publication and presented it at an international research conference. Misaki is a varsity track and field athlete.
This article deserves more attention. It should be released to major news outlets in newspaper, radio and television. Let's spread the word on this wonderful achievement. Congratulations to all the students who worked so hard on the project.





This box is decorated with a molecule of my Woven Triangles Tessellation IV. Based on the crease pattern, you can fold the complete box, or use just the central part and fold the tessellation. In contrast to other members of the Woven Triangles family, the molecule uses a 10 by 10 grid rather than 8 by 8.
In addition to photo diagrams, a clean precrease pattern is included. You can use it to fold the model without any visible grid lines. The precreases can be constructed using pure origami methods. You can find some tips on how to do that in my blog post.
Editor’s note: Daniel Scher created a PDF of an 8-inch clean crease pattern that can be printed on an 8½ x 11-inch sheet of paper. Daniel's original will give you a box with visible lines. I appended a version in which the lines are hidden inside the box. I also added crease patterns for 6-inch paper. All four versions are in the PDF above.
Editor’s note: If you want to make a basic masu bottom (with the edges of the blintz meeting at the center), here are the paper sizes you will need (and read no further):
The diagrams in the PDF above show how to make masu box bottoms of varying depths. Here is the range of paper sizes for 6- and 8-inch squares:
If you start with a 6-inch sheet (to make a 3-inch top):
If you use an 8-inch square sheet (to make a 4-inch top):


This model is an advanced version of Jun Maekawa’s Pyramid, which you can find in his book “Genuine Origami” published by Japan Publications Trading in 2008. This version differs from Maekawa’s in that you can indefinitely keep adding branches to every single pyramid wall that you’ve folded by iterating the folding sequence shown in the diagrams.
The word “fractal” in the title is used rather casually in the origami world — I think. However, fractal is a legitimate mathematical term. Therefore, when you say something is a fractal, you have to think about its definition, which I can’t tell you here because even mathematicians don’t know how to define it.  (Doesn’t make sense? I agree with you.)    Anyway, take a look at the bottom of the pyramid (if you ever fold it). The tips of branches meet densely and form a curve. This curve — even though it appears as the faintest haze — has specific interesting features and is thereby mathematically categorized as a fractal figure. (Doesn’t make sense? See my article “Fractal Crease Patterns” in Origami4: Fourth International Meeting of Origami, Science, Math, and Education, 35.)
Category: Geometric figure
Difficulty: Supercomplex
Paper size recommended for each iteration number n, when:
Warning: The diagrams show the easiest way to describe and follow the folding process, yet they are extremely difficult to execute and will severely damage your paper. Do not expect a reasonable result from any sort of aesthetic viewpoint when you use one sheet of paper as shown in the diagrams. To have your work look nice, do what I did for the photo: Precrease the whole square, cut it into small pieces, fold each of them nicely, and put them together with glue. I have never folded the entire shape from one sheet of paper without cutting, even for n=2.
Editor’s Note: Ushio Ikegami created this Fractal Pyramid in 2006 and published a general schematic for the model in Origami4. The diagrams presented here are much more detailed. This model is remarkable because it is the only (to my knowledge) origami model to accurately and precisely approximate a true mathematical fractal both in the crease pattern and in the folded form.
There are many “self-similar” origami models, meaning origami whose crease pattern and folded form involves a repeating pattern that gets smaller and smaller and could, in theory, fold “to infinity” towards a corner, center or edge of the paper. The term self-similar means exactly that: where a piece of the crease pattern is an exact, but shrunken, copy of the whole crease pattern (so, is “similar” to the original crease pattern in the sense of similar triangles).
Now, in mathematics, fractals are often self-similar, but not all self-similar objects are fractals. A filled-in square, for example, is self-similar (it is made of four copies of itself, each a copy of the original square shrunken by one-half), and a square is not a fractal. Rather, fractals are objects that can be self-similar but whose infinite progression part is some complicated curve, not just a point, line, or square. Self-similar origami, when examined closely, usually has the creases progress to a point or a line, which is not a fractal object. Ikegami’s Fractal Pyramid, on the other hand, has its creases converge to a complicated fractal curve. Therefore this model truly does deserve the honor of being an origami fractal. (By the way, mathematicians do have a working definition of the term fractal, but it is very technical, and there is some debate about whether or not the definition should be improved.)
This intimidates me in a way I’ve never felt a piece of paper would intimidate me
Very nice, I have the crease pattern from 2004 when I first saw it in Japan. Its great he decided to publish it.


“Six Simple Twists,” by Benjamin DiLeonardo-Parker, is not your typical origami book.
While this book does contain some diagrams, you’ll find far more text- and image-based references than traditional folding instructions.
This is a complete course in hexagonal-based @tessellations and may be the best platform to fully understand this narrow field of origami.
Before you get started, you’ll need to retune your expectations.  This book will provide the knowledge and skills you need to create tessellations, but it is a book focused on techniques, not models.
To be able to make the models, you have to understand the basics (Chapter 1), build a repertoire of solid techniques (Chapter 2), and deepen your understanding of the tesselation process (Chapter 3).
However, there is a price for such a comprehensive book.  There are no step-by-step diagrams to show you how to fold a specific tessellation. You will have to read it more than once — and I do mean read — in order to fully grasp each concept before you try your hand at completing the projects.
This book looks more like a high-school textbook than an origami book. It is heavy on text and short on diagrams. The lack of diagrams is compensated for with images — a lot of images.
The tendency to describe every step with words was tiresome for me, but I am sure there are readers who need this verbalization, especially if they are new to tessellations. Still, this over-texting results in strange cases where the text describes an image that is five pages ahead.
Chapter 1 is for absolute beginners. There are 11 pages describing how to make a grid of 16 in this chapter (and there are 2½ additional pages explaining how to create a grid of 32 in Chapter 2).
Once you get over that, Chapter 1 becomes a comprehensive guide for all the basic maneuvers you need. There are no complete projects, but you can unfold the model and use the same grid to practice the next maneuver.
Chapter 2 is the real thing. This is the place to learn and create some projects. Having learned the ABCs in Chapter 1, it is time to create a few folds of your own.
Here, you can learn how to perform a nub (rhombic twist), twist sink, back-twist, and other moves. Altogether, these are powerful and highly versatile techniques to have in your repertoire.
While Chapter 1 focuses on basic, academic instruction, Chapter 2 relies more on additional folding experience and assumes a much higher skill level.
Through this chapter, there are some sequences you could call “projects.” Yet, you do not get the complete picture. The author leaves it to you to determine the ideal starting point to achieve the size, grid, and spread of your desired module.
As you learn each pattern, the author includes various detours to answer specific questions and solutions relevant to a specific project. For example, a division of 36 is shown right after the Tulip Split Tessellation, although this is not the most logical or “orderly” place for it.
My personal preference would be to have all the grid instructions included together within the same chapter, not spread through the book, but I do see the benefit of having this extra knowledge when it is needed, after you have enough experience with simpler grids. This fits more with the concept of the book as a course rather than a collection of projects.
It is not an easy task to write a book that emphasizes technique rather than projects. It asks for more mental agility and discipline from folders, as well, as they must understand the more complex designs and overcome whatever obstacles they encounter along the way by studying the single molecule in the image.
There are no real diagrams. Instead, you have photos that show the details, along with step-by-step instructions. The major notations on the photos are numbers that represent the correct gap between two elements. Here and there, you will see thick lines designed to represent specific creases.  Rarely, you will also see indication arrows.
The images are small and dark — far too dark to study details. This combination creates situations where it’s almost impossible to see what is going on. The images are critical to the flow of this book, and for a book that tries to teach mainly by using images, you may find yourself asking how this can be.
Take a look at page 127 in the photo below. Image 2.21.2 (center) has three arrows on it. Can you spot all the three? You can if you have the digital version, but in the printed version (at least, my review copy) the result is so dark, you just cannot see them.
If mine is a representative copy, it seems that CRC Press failed to control the print quality. I do hope this is not the case, but this was the copy I got.
Unlike with traditional diagrams, the text runs in continuous paragraphs, rather than below each illustration, and refers to images by their number.
I am sure it was difficult to proofread this book, because I did find mistakes, but they were a minor nuisance.
The main problem is that you’re required to move your eyes back and forth from text to image (sometimes located on another page) in order to understand a technique. Often, this makes the instructions difficult to follow.
I tried my hand with the Shift Rosette Tessellation (photo of the model in progress above, and of the completed model below).
The first split (where a mountain ridge becomes two ridges) is four spaces away from the center. While it’s easy to count four from the center, the numbers are shown on the image of the completed step (second photo) rather than on the image of the paper before the move is made (first photo).
This is not easy to understand, and I was not sure which number related to each specific intersection.
I had to read and try my hand twice before everything was sitting correctly.
The natural behavior of the paper helped me a lot, and once I got it, the next steps were easier and quicker to grasp. As always, there is a sense of achievement once you manage to do it, but I am sure another mid-step image would have helped.
This is the second edition of the book, but the makeover is so complete that we can consider it as a new one.
The scope and depth of the book is huge, and I am sure it will appeal to those who fancy hexagonal-based @tessellations.
Yet the book raises a conflict. The skill level required to achieve and enjoy the content is high, and the only way you can achieve it is by using this book, as there is no alternative.
Because the book is comprehensive, however, I do believe that a determined novice folder could reach the potential heights demonstrated within.
Unfortunately, the quality of the images is not on par with the complexity of the folding process. This will cause moments of despair and frustration. I had too many moments where I tried to enlarge the images with a two-finger gesture, as I would have on a digital device. Unfortunately, this doesn’t work on paper!
Bottom line: For @tessellation lovers.
Q What is the essence of the book?
A 
The book is designed to teach my approach to origami @tessellation (or pleat pattern) design and is divided into three chapters, each very different in purpose.
Chapter 1 goes over the fundamentals and introductory definitions, including how to grid and how to create the titular “six simple twists,” and it invites the reader to become comfortable with the processes.
Chapter 2 demonstrates how to use the six twists in different contexts — surrounded by other twists, with various pleats interacting — and different modifications of the twists.
Chapter 3 leads to more abstraction: ways that other artists have used these twists to remarkable effect, ways to catalogue and document twists, and ways to fundamentally understand what a twist is.
With these differing focuses, I suppose the essence of the book is to guide the reader through learning about pleat patterns from the basics to as far as they want to go.
Q Who is your target audience? What makes your book suitable to this audience?
A Given the scope of the book, different chapters ended up targeting different audiences.
Chapter 1 is the fundamentals, focused on building the reader’s vocabulary, and is targeted to those with little-to-no experience with origami or origami @tessellations.
Chapter 2 is for those who have some experience with pleat patterns and want to learn new techniques for developing their own.
Chapter 3 is for folders who are interested in developing their mathematical understanding of twists, and want to cultivate their intuition on why twists happen the way that they do.
Q What changed in the second edition?
A A lot. This ended up being a top-down rewrite of the first edition.
In terms of scale, the second edition triples the number of pages and color photographs.
The photographs are clearer (not perfect, but better), and larger on the page. Also, at some point, I realized that if I were to diagram with numbered steps, each with a single photograph, it would be very difficult to see what a given maneuver was. For this reason, I decided to use step clusters, which used two to four photographs to show the setup, execution, and result of a given maneuver.
I really focused on getting definitions in place and adhering to those definitions as closely as possible. One of the difficulties for beginners is not having a cohesive vocabulary to fall back on, and everyone seems to use terms slightly differently.
A lot more time is spent on the foundational material in Chapter 1 to allow easier access to the pattern diagrams in Chapter 2. Without that foundation, it would have been too difficult to approach the more complicated patterns. This includes different ways of approaching some of the six simple twists and adds the concept of the “standing form” of a twist, which acts as a stopping place for a folder. Also, the notation system was introduced in Chapter 1 to give the reader a baseline for the analyses in Chapter 3.
Included in Chapter 2 is my counting method for spacing one twist off of another, which should help folders refine their understanding.
I also included other artists’ works in the gallery, and brought in math consultants to assist me with developing a notation system for pleat intersections, the latter of which is the biggest addition to the first edition.
Q What was most enjoyable in the process of the making of this book?
A Whew, that’s a tough one.
Toward the height of it, it was almost an obsession; I’d spend every moment I could at a local coffee shop typing and editing, and all of my thoughts were consistently on the best ways to explain something.
But I think the most enjoyable part with the development of the notation system and Brocard analysis with Matt Benet and Andrew Fisher — all of Chapter 3.
I learned things about twists that I’d never considered, or knew intuitively but could never describe, and I could finally write down difficult concepts in an intuitive way.
I asked CRC Press for a six-month extension so that I could get all of these concepts in there. It was some of the most fun I’ve had practicing origami.
Q What was left out of this book, and why?
A There wasn’t much left out; I tried to make sure to get everything I wanted in there.
There were a couple of patterns I had intended to include (like my geometry in the 
  Jungle Pattern ), but I ultimately decided they didn’t contribute to further understanding and were just variations of techniques already present in the book.
It would be better for the reader to come across those patterns themselves.
Editor’s Note: Ilan Garibi is the author of Origami @Tessellations for Everyone.
I've been thinking of trying tesselations, I need both writing and photographs though I am better with crisp, concise explanations. The dark photographs would be a deal breaker. I think whoever does the graphics needs to look at photographs of good origami instructions. Lighting is critical, also the color and texture of the paper and how it reflects light needs to be considered, may need to use a paper other than what is generally used. The cover photograph is beautiful, I have a feeling this was professionally photographed while the others may have been self photographed. You can do both but need to research carefully and take time setting up each shot. Yes it's difficult but it is definitely possible.








An increasing number of origami designers use pre-scoring machines. But just as there are many origami artists who use pre-scoring machines, there are many more individuals who may not be familiar with such tools. The aim of this article is to attempt to demystify the use of these tools through a question and answer format.
Q: How do these machines work?
A: This class of machines is called CNC-machines, where CNC stands for Computer Numerical Control. The machine has either a laser or knife that is operated entirely by computer, cutting or burning the desired shape.
Left: Pre-scored paper; Right: Cameo Silhouette 2.
Q: Do you all use the same machine?
A: No. Artists are using different machines to pre-crease, and the prices vary a lot. There are laser machines of varying sizes (e.g., Epilog), industrial vinyl cutters (like Graphtec), or plotters. I use a desktop cnc-cutter (Silhouette Cameo 2), originally sold for scrapbooking. You can buy it at Amazon for about $200. Yes, it’s about the same as an origami convention registration fee. If you have a Maker space near you, you can ask if they have a laser cutter or vinyl cutter.
Q: How does one of these machines score the paper?
Different machines work in different ways. Industrial machines can score the paper the same way one scores by hand: by pressing a rounded tip sharply into the paper, forming a dent on the paper that makes the paper tend to fold at that location.
Vinyl cutter-type machines have a knife blade that makes a shallow cut that does not go all the the way through the paper, making it fold relatively easily along the cut.
Laser cutters ablate the paper—that is, they burn away some or all of the paper and can work in one of two modes. One can adjust the power level so that they burn away just the surface layer, like a knife-based cutter, cutting only partway through the paper. Alternatively, they can be programmed to perforate the paper: burning many tiny holes in the paper, forming lines that are easier to fold by hand.
Q: Does it pre-crease mountains and valleys?
A: Generally not. Mine actually cuts only on one side. As far as I know, only Chris Palmer has access to a machine that can work on both sides of the paper. While one can usually fold a scored line easily in either direction, generally there is a preferred direction of folding. With knife-based cutters and lasers used in partial-ablation mode, the paper usually folds more easily away from the side that is marked. With perforation, the folds are genderless; they fold equally easily in either direction.
Q: If I buy a machine, would I have the same perfect curves as you?
A: Yes and no. If you can make good folds now, you will be able to make better folds with the machine. If you are struggling now with easy things, the machine won’t help you. After all, you need to collapse the pattern, and here your own hands and skills come into action. I have seen people struggling with my pre-creased sheets. A machine is not a panacea. And everybody surely needs practice.
Q: What is the process of creating origami with the machine?
A: 1. First you need to have a design to fold. Then you need a vector crease pattern of the model. Vector here means that the curves in your file are represented not as a bitmap, as an array of dots (like in a photograph: bitmap formats include bmp, jpg, png, gif) but as mathematical curves defined according to some formula (these include file formats like dxf, ai, eps, and obj). There are also container formats, like pdf, which can contain either bitmap, vector, or a mixture of both.
To get this vector CP you can either use a special origami tool (like Jun Mitani's ORI-REVO) or Oripa or general-purpose commercial vector image editing software (like Adobe Illustrator, or AutoCad, Inkscape, or Affinity Designer). Some cutting machines work directly with vector PDF files.
Next you need to find paper that works with this cutting machine. If it’s a laser machine, you probably can use any kind of paper (and even non-paper materials like Mylar, wood laminate, and pressed composites).
With a cutting machine, though, the paper cannot be too thin. I usually use Tant paper for its strength, thickness, texture and price. Elephant Hide should also work well, but the price is higher. Some people use watercolor paper or even polypropylene. If you are searching for the latter, try Yupo, a foldable polypropylene. Just note that these materials might be thicker than you expect.
Q: Is it possible to make curved folds without machines?
A: YES! I started designing without any mechanical aid. This is the album
of my old works, where I only used a compass and templates. Can you tell the difference from this album. Moreover the hand-scored paper has a huge advantage; you can have mountains and valleys, and you don’t need to reverse anything. And the paper won’t break anywhere, as may happen with machine-scored paper.
Left: Hand-scored tessellation. Right: Machine pre-scored tessellation.
Q: How can I fold/design without machines?
A: You need to make cardboard templates and use some kind of dull needle. Some modeling tools or prickers are fine. (Robert J. Lang recommends a burnishing tool, used in the past for transfer lettering, for manual scoring.)
If you have a PDF file, you just print it, glue the curves to more resistant cardboard and get your customized French curve. Oh yes, you can always help yourself with French curves, too!
Q: Why would you use the machine, if you can do without?
A: There are two reasons. First, well, I am not accurate. I do make many mistakes. If you are making a modular, you can discard the bad unit and fold one more. You cannot discard a piece of tessellation. That’s why I avoided @tessellations for many years, because I became frustrated by my mistakes. And the second reason is that hand scoring is time-consuming. I have too many ideas, and if I hand-score paper, I won’t make much progress.
Q: Why does everyone keep silent about machines?
A: Well, now many people know about them. At the same time I have heard what people who don’t use machines would say about people who have, that machines do everything for them. I've seen people discussing the other person, and I could only add “I use it too. Buy one for yourself and stop judging...” I have also seen people lose interest when they hear I (or somebody else) have used automated pre-creasing. But even if you use a computer to help you, you still need a lot of inspiration and mastery to create a good design. And you still need your folding skills to collapse it. Personally I would be happy if more people have those little helpers, because then I could make a book with tessellations that everyone could fold with less hassle.
Appendix
Here is a partial list of artists and the scoring machines they use.
Kate has posted an even more detailed, v. helpful article about cutting machines on her blog: https://blog.kusudama.me/2017/09/19/cutting-machines-faq/
https://blog.kusudama.me/2017/10/07/vinyl-cutter-origami/
Would it be possible to prescore with other silhouette cameos or industrial laser cutters such as Glowforge? In my household we have both and my mother keeps offering to let me prescore and cut paper with the silhouette cameo 3...
It looks like the Glowforge will work: https://community.glowforge.com/t/origami-with-the-glowforge/22033/17
I've got a cameo 3 and it works, but I find the sticky substrate a little tricky to use, especially with thin paper.








The Year of the Rooster certainly began auspiciously! In addition to visiting Chimei Museum’s Origami Universe exhibition, I had the good luck to be in Tokyo during Tomoko Fuse’s exhibition at the Tsunagu Gallery, on display from 6 February 2017 through 31 March 2017.
For those people who can read Japanese, here are two posters describing the exhibition and providing background information about Tomoko Fuse and her art:

Given the short period of time the exhibition was available, here is a slide show of the beautiful artwork on display. Press the left and right buttons to flip through the images.
-Patsy Wang-Iverson
Thank you for posting photos of these incredible origami works, Patsy.  This was an inspiring way to start my day!
Charlotte, Thank YOU for the note and for looking at the article. Patsy


3.4.6.4 is one of my favorite patterns as it’s quite unusual. It cannot fit on a classic triangle grid due to the squares; therefore this is a “distorted” approximation as the hexagons and the triangles have different side lengths, so there are rectangular twist-folds instead of square ones.
Paper: Use a regular hexagon, at least 20cm side to side, with a grid in 32nds. You can obtain nice results with semi-transparent papers such as tracing paper or glassine.
Click on pictures for Crease Patterns.
Editor's Note: Alessandro Beber is self-publishing Paperceptions: Explore visual perceptions with paperfolding!  through a Kickstarter campaign that ends 17 May 2017.
–Alessandro Beber








Ashok Stambh refers to the top part of victory pillars raised by Lord Ashok of India (500 b.c.). Its image is used by the Indian Government as an official seal. This model is based on a photograph of Ashok Stambh at Sanchi. It consists of four identical lion fronts.
To fold the model completely is fairly complex. Your first attempt is likely to
be a failure. 
Therefore it is advisable to fold only one quadrant for your first attempt. Formation of scales on the chest of these lions is a time consuming process. For the first attempt, only do the pleating required to produce these scales, and do not spend time on actually forming the scales.
Images of the folded model: small on left, 6ft tall on right. 
Click on images for diagrams.
In any origami fold, we need to find certain points with required proportions, typically called reference points. Extensive prefolding is done to locate these points. However, this aproach
is impractical in this case due to a large number of points, and their proportion being dictated
by the original sculpture. Therefore, this model is based on reference points determined by use of a scale. The original size of the paper is assumed to be 1000 units square, with points described in terms of these units.
To start, take a square 30 cm square and fold one lion figure. For the first attempt, try a 70 gsm map litho paper. You may experience difficulty in folding the crimps required to form the mane around the face as paper can become very thick. However, for the first attempt these crimps can be skipped. Also crimping the top portion of the nose and forming eye sockets may be difficult with plane paper. For the first attempt, put a spot of glue onto the crimp at the top of the nose to stop it from opening.

Use large, rough tracing paper for the final fold. Color it to your preference. Foil backing helps to keep many crimps in place. It is not necessary to foil back the entire paper. For paper with 1000 units on a side, apply foil to a 300 unit square at the center on the back of the paper. In addition, as heads are formed by folding down the corners of the paper, a 155 unit square portion on each of the four corners should also be added to the front of the paper. See the image above. Happy Folding!
-Vishwas Deval
Astonishing!









M.C. Escher has been a great source of creative inspiration for me. For a long time, I have tried very hard to capture his never-ending stairs (from Ascending and Descending, 1960) in a @tessellation but have yet to succeed. However, in my pursuit I managed to capture some essence of the question "Is it going up this way or that way?" raised by Relativity, 1953, as can be seen in my Zipper Tessellation above. From this stating point, I was able to find several variations, each one made from a single sheet of paper. Two such variations are circular: a Zipper Ring and a three-layer variation each shown below.

All three models are minor variations on the same pattern that  range in difficulty. Let's begin with the simplest, the Zipper Ring, which is not a regular tessellation, but is easier to collapse than the flat version. You can find full diagrams for this model here. From there, try to make the three-layered version as an extension of the ring, comparing the original ring's crease pattern to that of the three-layered version. Achieving this, you can try the original Zipper Tessellation, which is much harder to collapse. Note that you can collapse it either flat or in tubular form.
Two additional variations, my Zipper Vase and "Go THIS Way!" tessellation are shown below. You can find crease patterns and assembly discussion for these last three in this document. I do hope you enjoy folding these. Just try not to get disoriented!
-Ilan Garibi

Wonderful. I just tried this model today. It's really fun to fold. I will try to add more layers later.


In recent years there's been a great buzz around a new area of origami: @tessellations! Essentially, these are patterns you fold and which you can repeat over and over, extending the design. In other words, it is a tiling.
But this article isn't so much about what @tessellations are. If you'd like to know more about that, David Lister wrote some essays, which give great background information and an interesting insight into the history of @tessellations: Part 1, Part 2, and Part 3. Ilan Garibi also wrote an article classifying tessellations, going into the creation process, as well as giving tips on useful tools: @Tessellations: A Brief Theory of Warping Paper (TheFold Issue 2).
While designers such as Yoshihide Momotani and Shuzo Fujimoto explored @tessellations early on, only recently did these folds become more main-stream. With it an explosion of stunning designs have emerged.
As is usually true for a new area of origami, great pictures started to appear, but folding these tessellations remained a bit of a secret for some time. Then crease patterns were shared, but these aren't well understood by everyone. The first big publication (in English) that demystified tessellations and explained how to fold several stunning projects was Origami @Tessellations by Eric Gjerde (also available at The Source).
Still, the learning curve for folding tessellations is steep for many, sometimes too steep. Although Eric Gjerde's book is fantastic, it does require good basic origami skills and perhaps a love for working out the details yourself. This is why I decided to make a bunch of instructional videos, which help a bit with those details. For starters, I presented some origami tessellations step-by-step. It's perhaps the easiest way to get going if you already folded other non-@tessellation models, be it from video or diagrams.
But the true magic of @tessellations lies in creating your own designs and patterns and how easy it is compared to designing representational origami. You can start experimenting: fold a grid and then see how you can collapse the grid into shapes and continue on. At least at first, it's probably better to concentrate on structures that do fold flat, although tessellations with 3D components are definitely possible and have a beauty in themselves.
Or, if you aren't so much about experimenting in the wild, you can learn about some basic rules that will apply to all tessellations. Knowing these rules opens you a whole world of exploring @tessellations. I myself was introduced to these rules by Ilan Garibi when I met him at the CDO Convention in 2010 (in Italy). I then made a video, lovingly and jokingly calling it a "Tessellesson". It demonstrates the technique on a model called "Bricks" by Ilan Garibi, which works on a square grid. But the rules can be applied to other grids and in particular also triangle grids.
And once you know the rules, all you need is some "molecules" that you want to use and combine to construct your crease pattern to collapse. You can either - as before - experiment to come up with some of these. Or you can use techniques others have already explored. Some of the more common techniques I have presented in short videos. In particular, here's a playlist on techniques that work on a triangle grid, and which are also presented in Eric Gjerde's Origami @Tessellations:
Once you master these techniques you can use them in two ways: either to create your own designs by combining them; or simply to understand how to collapse crease patterns of designs others have come up with and shared. For example, Eric Gjerde has posted some crease patterns on his website http://www.origami@tessellations.com/, as have many others on their websites or Flickr albums (e.g. Andy Wilson, Christiane Bettens, Ilan Garibi, and Melina Hermsen, and Ralf Konrad). Anna Alekseeva put together a set of pictures classifying different tessellations according to their wallpaper group. Another great resource is Alex Bateman's website. It not only includes crease patterns, but also a program, with which you can create crease patterns for tessellations.
And if you want to see extraordinary representational work with the use of @tessellation techniques, do check out Joel Cooper's website or his Flickr album - in particular his masks.
With that I wish you happy folding and exploring the world of origami @tessellations!








@Tessellations are the new trend in the origami world. Definitions, which, by definition, try to draw definite border lines, can only do injustice to this field. There are Corrugations, Molecules, Curved @Tessellations, and so many other subcategories. Here is my humble addition to this field.
First, let's define the types of @tessellations. I am not familiar with any formal definition, even Wikipedia leaves this term unexplored.
I like to divide the tessellation world into 4 categories:
"Red Flower" Tessellation designed and folded by Ilan Garibi, Tant
The Classic is, well, classic. Since Fujimoto, a Japanese origami master who published books that included origami tessellations in the 1960s till nowadays, this is the most common type. It's based on two major grid types - the Hexagon and the Square. It is made of Molecules that can be spread in all four (or six) directions, covering a continuous surface. By nature, the surface of the final model will have an odd number of layers (one, three, five, or even more) throughout. This is because whenever the paper is first folded this way, it must be folded the other way, too, to allow continuity. This change of number of layers gives the most amazing effect when you backlight your model. One layer is a bit transparent while three layers and more are dark. For that reason one tessellation can give you four models: first side, the other side, and both sides backlit.
"Diamond Corrugation" Tessellation designed and folded by Ilan Garibi, 40gsm Kraft paper
Borrowed from the English dictionary, a corrugation is: a wrinkle; fold; furrow; ridge. This type of tessellation has no triple or more layers. The entire original surface of the paper is visible to the eye, and the pattern is usually in the form of waves. There is no point in using backlighting on this type.
"Hydrangea" designed by Shuzo Fujimoto, folded by Sara Adams, Dreamy paper
Recursive @tessellations are unique. The concept here is to make the same fold in a smaller scale on one square in a repetitive manner. A classic recursive model is the Hydrangea by Fujimoto.
"Wave" Tessellation designed and folded by Ilan Garibi, Elephant Hide
Last in my list is the group of folds that are simply done this way: one row folded back and two rows are folded forth. Repeat.
Of course, you can combine several types of @tessellations in one project. For example, you may want to use a classic tessellation to form a border for a recursive central piece (left), or use a recursive tessellation as a molecule for a classic tessellation (right).
"Windows" Tessellation designed and folded by Ilan Garibi, Elephant Hide
High density tiling of the "Hydrangea" by Shuzo Fujimoto, folded by Sara Adams, Rainbow Kraft paper
This video shows further classic tessellations:
Tessellations are usually folded in three steps only: Grid, Precrease (all other folds than the grid) and collapse. Each step has some basic know-how and many tips, but before elaborating on that, we have to discuss the single molecule - the core of the model.
When I try to create a new classic tessellation, I follow the Way of the Molecule. A molecule is one unit of the tessellation: the repetitive part. I try to find an interesting molecule that follows two very simple rules:
Moving to real molecules, let's start with only two square molecules. A trick for checking whether they can be tessellated is to glue-tape the edges together. If you can spread the folded molecules to their original flat state, align them and put a cellotape to hold them together, and then collapse the combined units, why cut the paper in the first place? Now start with a 1×2 rectangle of a paper, crease all needed creases on both squares, and collapse without the need for a cellotape.
For a better example, take the basic twist fold (the base of Kawasaki Rose). The pattern on all four sides is the same; hence you can put two molecules one by the other, unfold the common edges and tape them together. Now collapse both of them to get your first 1×2 molecules tessellation. Again, if we can tape two, why can't we start with two connected squares, in other words a rectangle of 1×2 proportions? Do all folds on both squares, and collapse.

Note that the twist direction had to be changed on the second molecule, to allow continuity.
These are simple rules, yet they are probably sufficient to make all classic tessellations.
To create a new molecule (for a Classic or a Recursive Tess) all that's needed is to follow two pieces of advice: Dare and Play. Dare to doodle with paper, grid it, mold it, and then try again. And again. It works for me.
A tip for this section - having a molecule that applies to the rules may not be enough. There is a third request - it must be collapsible. To make sure it is so, first try to collapse your molecule on a 2×2 tessellation, and then on a 3×3, which have the center molecule bordered by other molecule from all 4 sides. If those two tessellations can be collapsed, you can go to larger numbers.
Do not feel bad if you came up with this marvelous model, just to get a remark on your Flickr page, saying: "Oh, I did that a year ago, see it here...". This field of creation is very mathematical and many people discovered the same model independently. Enjoy your power of creation, even if you are not the first!
Tessellations are usually made from grids. Divide the paper to 32 equal parts on both directions to get a 32×32 Grid. 16 grids may be good for beginners, and 64 grids will bring an amazing effect and finger aches. Common grids are the Square and the Hexagon (which includes the Triangle grid, since we all fold our hexagon by making six triangles). More rare ones are the Rectangle, usually 1×2 proportion, and the Diamond:

Making a grid may seem trivial, but the truth is far from that. My first tip is always doing your creases bi-directional. It is a double effort, but it is often very helpful in the collapse phase.
Now, to get a 2×2 grid, you need one horizontal crease and one perpendicular to it. That's easy to do - just divide into half in both directions. To get a 4×4 - divide all halves into quarters. Still easy - this is a cupboard fold, actually. Going to 8×8 starts to be problematic - getting the first 1⁄8 line is easy - fold the edge to the 1⁄4 line. But how do you get the 3⁄8 line?

One solution immediately pops up - fold the edge to the 3⁄4 line, which divides this length to 3⁄8. This may be good for a 8×8 grid, but not that good for a 16×16, lousy for a 32×32, terrible for a 64×64 and disastrous for a 128×128 grid. The reason lies in the fact that every crease shrinks the paper a bit. When you fold the edge to the 46⁄64 line to get the 23⁄64 line, the distance of the 46th line is not 46⁄64 of the paper, but shorter than that. See this full sheet of Elephant Hide after folding a 128×128 grid on it. It's aligned on the bottom right corner with a full, virgin sheet (70×100cm):

It may seem negligible, 2.6% of shrinkage, but believe me - it does make a major change - squares are no longer squares, and a diagonal creases does not fall on the corners.
The right diagram shows how it should be done: in order to get the 3⁄8, pinch the 1⁄4 line and fold it upon the 1⁄2 line. To get the 23⁄64 line, pinch the 22nd line upon the 24th line. And reverse that fold, so you will finish with all your horizontal creases as mountain folds.
The next tip regards the rotation of the paper. Since it is quite difficult to make a perpendicular crease against 64 mountain fold lines, do not crease 64 horizontal creases and then rotate the paper to complete the perpendicular ones. Instead divide a side in half, and rotate. Divide the new side into quarters, and rotate. Back to the first side, divided it into 8ths, and rotate. Divide into 16ths, and rotate. You get it, I hope.
The same logic applies to the Hexagon grid.
Some grids demand the diagonals to be folded, too. This brings up another tip - for grids up to 8×8, you can use the "fold the corner of a square to the opposite one" to fold line AB in one movement of the hand. For denser grids a more careful approach is needed. You can use the corner as a general guide, but when you mark the fold, refer to each single square as one - fold from the corner of it to the opposite one, and move to the next square. This is much tedious way, but far more accurate!

Unlike traditional origami, tessellations are mostly based on precreases. Some have a step by step way to get there,  but for most you have to prepare all the folds in advance, and then collapse the model.
For most tessellations, this is the most time consuming phase. I think the most basic molecule needs at least 4 creases, and usually much more. Multiply your molecule number by that and understand how many short creases in all 4 directions you should fold. Luckily, there are short cuts for that. Many creases will align and can be folded in one stroke.

Notice that molecules 1, 2 and 3 in the image all contribute to one straight line (in red): the top-left fold line of molecule 2 (AB); the bottom-right line of molecule 1 (BC); and again the top-left fold line of molecule 3 (CD). So folding in one movement line AD gives you a major short cut.
Finding a shortcut is a bit harder with the inner squares that do not form a straight combined line. Here we move to another method: Counting. All 3 blue lines are aligned. Now start with the blue line of Molecule 1, and count 3 squares (marked in green) to get to the next square to which a diagonal fold needs to be added (in blue again). So this is the rhythm for that CP: crease 1, count 3, and repeat.
There is a cosmic law, saying that in every 32×32 grid and up tessellation you fold, you will make a mistake: dislocating a crease, jumping over a fold line in the grid, whatever. Do not feel bad. It's a cosmic law.
Can't do it! Can't do it! Oh, maybe I can. (Deep breath). Oh, yes I can!
Yep, collapse is the stage that endangers your sanity. "It can't be done" comes to your mind again and again, and the cat jumps whenever a frustration cry is sounded. But, it really can be done. OK, enough with the psychology issues.
Collapsing a model can be done from center to edge, or from the corner, row by row. The rule is simple - with square grids I start at the corner, completing one molecule, folding the rest of the paper all the way to the edges, as if this is the only molecule to be folded. Then I add another one and so on, till the end of the row. The first row is simple. The second row starts easily, but the second molecule is surrounded from two sides with folded molecules and the other two sides are flat paper. This is where the difficulties lay. If you can fold that molecule, all the rest are just the same. For some tessellations, it is good to partially collapse all molecules in a row, before collapsing them one by one. This saves a bit of work in unfolding creases that will be in your way for the next row.
For a Hexagon tessellation, I always start from the center, (unless the center has no molecule, and then you start with the inner circle of 6 molecules). I do not really know why. This is how it is. Then you make the first circle around, with 6 molecules, when the last (the 6th in the first circle) can give you some troubles. This is mostly because you need to unfold some pleats you made to allow yourself to work on the paper. When opening the paper, you may have to be careful not to unfold the adjoining molecules - but it is necessary to complete that final molecule. If this proves too difficult, do try to fold the 5th and the 6th together instead!
The only tip I can give here is "do not give up". The folder is stronger than the paper.
When folding a tessellation, I sometimes found out that there is a rhythm, a repetitive method to do things correctly - write it down the moment you realize that sequence. It will help you tremendously the next time you try to fold it.
"Egyptian Desert at Night" Tessellation designed and folded by Ilan Garibi, Elephant Hide
Do not start to fold tessellations if you have no clips, either metal or wood, and lots of them.  The wood ones tend to break apart, and are too weak. You need to put 2 of them on every crease.
Some of the metal ones are too strong and leave their marks on the paper. But if your point of  pressure is in the back of the model, (and do remember that a lot of tessellations are good from both sides) they are much better. You can also avoid the marks by using some padding (e.g.  some extra paper).
I use a professional Bone folder, from Nicolas Terry's online store (www.origami-shop.com) and thank god for that. My hands feel much better with that than folding with my fingers and fingernail pressure. North Americans can enjoy the Milk Jar Bone Folder - this redundant piece of plastic that hangs by the handle; parents for small children can use the flat, tiny scoop that comes with the Kinder eggs, to scoop the chocolate out.
During the precrease step, with many folds behind and more to come, you may become lost, losing your place and rhythm with the Grid. For that I have found a very useful method. Before precreasing, I mark the center of every molecule, or sometimes the first row and column only, with a Blu-Tack point. It can easily be removed without any residue, and will help you stay oriented throughout.
Scoring is the procedure that weaken the paper where folds should be, in advance, either by hand or by machine (called Plotter). The masters even uses LASER plotters. If you are a mortal folder like me, you probably do not have one. So I do not score the paper in advance, but fold it traditionally. If you do want to give it a try, it can be done with a ruler and an empty ball pen (or any other blunt item you have). I have only one model that requires scoring. It's all made from curved lines, and I used an empty pen for that.
This topic could fill a few pages, but I do not have enough experience to do it. Maybe next time.
One of my first original designs was actually a mistake I made on the day after one of our monthly meeting during the winter of 2008. Gila, a fellow folder, taught me how to puff seven stars on one sheet of paper. Trying unsuccessfully to reproduce this model at home I called her angrily, saying " I can not do it again! I got something totally different - I have the puffed stars with double the height and the distance from each other is too short!" . "Oh, great", she said, " you invented a new tessellation!"
Early 2011, a video about my Bricks Tess was made by Sara Adams, making me as proud as a father of a newly 4.7 Kg new born baby boy. I believe that by reading this manual and watching Sara's tutorial, you are well equipped to start some of your own mistakes! Good luck, and Happy Folding!




