25 Awesome Origami Tessellations that Would Impress Even M.C. Escher
Origami tessellations are essentially patterns, folded with origami, that repeat themselves as long as you want to continue folding.
There are 2 major types of @tessellations, the classic type and corrugations.
Classic tessellations are usually based on either a square or hexagonal grid. The paper in these tessellations is folded into an odd number of layers to make the shapes and patterns.
There’s always an odd number of layers since the paper needs to always be folded back on itself to continue the pattern.
Because different sections of the tessellations have different numbers of layers you can turn on a light behind the tessellation for some neat effects.
Corrugations are made with one layer and the tessellation pattern is formed with wrinkles and waves in the paper. You can see the entire surface of the paper and it doesn’t look that neat to put a light behind it.
There are a couple other types of @tessellations and even combinations of them in the same model. This post features a collection of mostly classic @tessellations and corrugations.
Our first image for this post is a basket weave classic tessellation. It was photographed at an origami convention.
This next model is an example of a corrugation. You can see how the paper is folded into waves and is all one layer, especially when compared to the previous example.
Here’s a flowery looking classic tessellation.
Here’s another excellent corrugation. It’s design is based on M. C. Escher’s Ascending and Descending stairs artwork.
This next image is a third type of @tessellation called a Recursive @Tessellation. These @tessellations are kind of fractal in design with the pattern getting smaller towards the middle and larger towards the outside.
Here’s an example of a tessellation with a backlight.
This is an absolutely incredible tessellation. Alessandro Beber is an expert at weaving in different shapes and designs into the pattern.
Here’s another fantastic example of an origami corrugation.
Here’s a fantastic classic style tessellation pattern.
I’ve the 3D look of Alessandro Beber’s tessellations.
In this next image you can see how you can continue the pattern indefinitely if you have large enough paper.
Here’s another awesome corrugation.
This tessellation is designed to look like a series of pagodas.
Here we have a beautiful tessellation that’s sort of a mixture between classic @tessellations and corrugations.
A lot of these tessellations almost look like the magic eye images. You can almost get lost in them when you stare for a while.
Here’s another one of Alessandro Beber’s awesome 3D-looking designs.
This next model is a very unique idea creating an origami tessellation with a set of paper trees. The end result is a pretty cool looking forest.
This tessellation is an excellent example of how @tessellations don’t have to be based simple geometric shapes. You can also create great curved or organic looking patterns.
Ekaterina Lukasheva also made a time lapse video showing the model being folded.
Here’s another excellent corrugation design.
Here’s a kind of delicious looking tessellation.
This tessellation is also inspired by M.C. Escher.
Here’s another awesome 3D optical illusion-like tessellation.
This next tessellation has quite a different design and shows that you can combine different patterns and shapes to make something unique.
I quite like how you can see both sides of this tessellation. It’s cool seeing how the back of it looks, in many cases the back of the pattern also has a really cool look.
Our final model for this post is something very unique. Ilan Garibi used origami @tessellation techniques to make this paper QR code. The crazy thing is that this QR code actually works. If you hold your phone up to your monitor you can actually scan it!
This model uses 64 sheets of paper.
If you want to get into origami @tessellations we recommend you check out the book Origami @Tessellations: Awe-Inspiring Geometric Designs by Eric Gjerde. It has some great beginner level @tessellations if you’re just starting out as well as some much harder ones if you’re looking for a challenge.

25 Incredible Origami Tessellations that Could Go on Forever
Origami @Tessellations are a very interesting and unique use of paper. Especially if you appreciate the mathematics and design behind them.
In a previous post we talked about the different kinds of @tessellations and a bit of the history behind them.
For this post we’re going to get right into the @tessellations starting with this very neat looking brick wall.
This next image is something quite unique. Andrey Ermakov used a hexagon shaped sheet of paper to fold a Yin Yang symbol with two different tessellation patterns.
Alessandro Beber has a lot of really cool designs with 3D looking shapes folded into the design. He’s currently working on a book with instructions to fold some of his designs and hopefully it’ll be out soon.
Here’s an absolutely beautiful looking tessellation. It’s folded from elephant hide paper, painted with alcohol based ink and covered with ivory coloured acrylic spray which gives it the rose colours.
Here’s another excellent brick wall-like tessellation pattern from Ilan Garibi.
I’ve always liked these 3D sort of optical illusion shapes and Alessandro Beber is a master of working them into origami @tessellation designs.
This is more of a fractal-like pattern.
I really like how this next design looks like a bunch of interlocked chain links or a weaved basket. The title of “Stitched” is very appropriate.
@Tessellations don’t have to just be 2 dimensional. Melina Hermsen designed this cool looking 3D tower pattern.
Because @tessellations use the same repeating pattern the back of the model is often just as great looking if not better than the front. Here’s one of Ilan Garibi’s brick tessellations viewed up close and from the back.
Here’s another one of those great 3D cube tessellations from Alessandro Beber.
This is another excellent close up view of a semi-3D looking tessellation.
This tessellation looks really great but it’s actually the back side of the model.
For this next tessellation Alessandro Beber took a hexagon sheet of paper, made all the creases, unfolded it and then treated the paper with water and black ink to give it the colour. Then he refolded everything and the result is what you see here.
Here’s another beautiful close-up tessellation photo. As one of the commenters on the original photo says it almost looks like bridges and tunnels.
Here’s another awesome looking fractal design.
This next one is absolutely fantastic. It would be really neat to see something like a whole wall of this pattern. The paper here is really beautiful too.
Here’s another one of Jun Mitani’s excellent designs.
Apparently this next tessellation is so strong that you can stand on it! The physics behind some of these origami tessellations must be very interesting.
Here’s another excellent design from Alessandro Beber. It’s folded from a very large hexagon shaped piece of paper.
The colours in this next model are painted with acrylic paints and the paper looks really beautiful. The tessellation design is made to resemble an old flag-stone road.
In this next tessellation you can really see how the patterns could continue to be folded forever if you had infinite paper.
Here’s another back view of one of Ilan Garibi’s designs.
The paper used in this next tessellation is absolutely beautiful.
Our final image for this post is this “6 Petals Flower Tessellation’ from Ilan Garibi. It took him 256 minutes to fold the whole thing.
What are your experiences with paper @tessellations? Let us know in the comments and feel free to share a photo of anything you’ve folded yourself!

15 Beautiful Close-Up Photos of Origami Tessellations
A tessellation is a tiling repeating pattern using geometric shapes called tiles that repeat over and over with no gaps or overlaps.  If you’re familiar with the work of M.C. Escher then you’ve probably seen this sort of art before.
It’s possible to create tessellations out of origami as well by taking a large piece of paper and folding different sections of it into repeating tiles and shapes.  The results as you can see in the photos below can be quite beautiful.  The size of the tessellation is really only limited by the size of your paper and how much patience you have as a folder.
Here are 16 up close photos of origami tessellations folded by some expert origami artists you should definitely check out.

